ne by one, non-stop and at random, embellishing the crude and
flimsy stuff of life with a never-ending stream of ornaments. There
were young girls, bishops magnificent copes, battles won, theatres full
of noise and light, and then more young girls, walks in the dark of night
beneath the spreading arms of the chestnut trees. There was always a
party going on in my imagination. I could think about whatever I liked,
I was free.
Now Im a prisoner. My body is in irons in a dungeon, my mind
imprisoned in an idea. A terrible, bloody, remorseless idea! I have only
one thought now, one belief, one certainty: condemned to death!
Whatever I do this hellish thought is always there, like a leaden ghost
beside me, alone and jealous, driving all other distractions away, face
to face with wretched me, shaking me with its icy hands whenever I try
and turn away or close my eyes. It creeps in everywhere my mind would
like to escape to, mingles with every word thats spoken to me like an
awful chorus, presses itself against the bars of my dungeon with me;
haunts my waking, spies on my spasmodic sleep, appears in my dreams
in the shape of a blade.
I have just woken with a start, hounded by it, thinking: Oh, its
just a dream! But no! Before my heavy eyelids have had time to open
wide enough to see the deadly reality that surrounds me on the damp,
dripping flagstones of my cell, in the pale glimmer of light from my
lamp, in the coarse weave of my rough canvas clothes, on the stern
face of the sentry whose cartridge pouch glints through the bars of 
my dungeon, it seems as if a voice has already whispered in my ear:
Condemned to death!
It was on a fine morning in august.
It was three days since my trial had begun, three days that my name
and crime had been drawing hordes of onlookers who swept down
onto the benches of the courtroom like crows round a corpse, three
days that the fantastical band of judges, witnesses, lawyers, crown
prosecutors had passed back and forth in front of me, now grotesque,
now bloody, always grim and deadly. The first two nights I couldnt
sleep from anxiety and dread; on the third I slept from boredom and
fatigue. At midnight I left the jury deliberating. I was taken back to the
straw in my dungeon and straight away fell into a deep sleep, a sleep of
oblivion. It was the first rest I had had for many days.
I was still at the deepest point of that deep sleep when they came
to wake me. This time the heavy tread and hobnailed boots of the
deputy jailer, the jangling of his keys, the harsh grating of the bolts
was not enough; it took his rough voice in my ear, his rough hand
on my arm to drag me from listlessness  Get up then! I opened
my eyes, sat up in alarm. At that instant, through the high narrow
window of the cell I saw, on the ceiling of the corridor outside, the
only sky it was given me to see, that yellowish play of light by which
eyes grown accustomed to the gloom of prison immediately recognize
the sun. I love the sun.
Nice weather, I said to the jailer.
For a moment he didnt reply, as if unsure whether it was worth the
cost of a word; then with some effort he muttered curtly:
Maybe.
I didnt move, mind half-drowsy, mouth smiling, eyes fixed on the
soft golden ripples that were mottling the ceiling.
Looks like a nice day, I repeated.
Yes, he replied. Theyre waiting for you.
Those few words, like the thread that stops a fly in mid-flight,
hurled me back to reality. As if in a flash of lightning I suddenly saw
the dark courtroom, the horseshoe of judges weighed down with their
blood-soaked rags, the three rows of witnesses with silly faces, the
two policemen at each end of my bench, and the black gowns bustling
about, the faces of the crowd thronging in the shadows at the back
and, fastened on me, the fixed gaze of the twelve jurors who had stayed
awake while I was asleep!
I got up; my teeth were chattering, my hands were shaking and couldnt
find my clothes, my legs were weak. With my first step I stumbled like
a porter with too much to carry. Yet I followed the jailer.
Two policemen were waiting outside the cell. They put the handcuffs
back on me. They had a small, awkward little lock that they did up
carefully. I let them: it was one machine working on another.
We went across an inner courtyard. The brisk morning air revived
me. I looked up. The sky was blue and, interrupted by the tall chimneys,
warm rays of sunlight traced patterns at the top of the tall dark walls
of the prison. It was beautiful.
We went up a spiral staircase; we passed a corridor, then another,
then a third; then a low door opened. A mixture of noise and warm
air hit me in the face: it was the breath of the crowd in the courtroom.
I went in.
As I appeared there was a mumble of weapons and voices. Benches
were shifted noisily. Partitions creaked, and as I crossed the long room
between the two blocs of the public behind walls of soldiers, it was
as if I was the central point to which the strings that made all these
gaping, straining faces move were attached.
At that moment I noticed I wasnt in irons, but I couldnt remember
when they had been taken off.
Then there was silence. I reached my seat. The moment the
commotion stopped among the crowd, it stopped in my mind too. And
suddenly I understood clearly what up till then I had only made out
confusedly, that the critical moment had arrived, that I was here to
hear my sentence.
Its hard to explain, but the way the idea came to me didnt frighten
me at all. The windows were open; the noises and the air of the town
came in from outside; the room was bright as if for a wedding; here and
there cheerful sunbeams traced the brilliant outline of the casements
along the floor, across the tables, sometimes broken up in the corners;
and from the dazzling diamond shapes of the windows each ray carved
out a great prism of golden dust in the air.
At the far end the judges seemed satisfied, presumably delighted that
they would soon be finished. In the presiding judges face, lit up softly
by a reflection from a window pane, there was something peaceful and
kind; a young assessor, carefully rearranging his bands, was chatting
away almost merrily with a pretty lady in a pink hat who had been
given a seat behind him as a special favour.
Only the jury looked pale and exhausted, but it must have been
from being up all night. Some of them were yawning. Nothing in their
expressions gave any sign that these were men who had just handed
down a death sentence; all I could make out on the faces of these good
citizens was the desire to get some sleep.
Opposite me a window was wide open. I could hear the laughter of
the flower sellers on the embankment; and on the edge of the window a
pretty little yellow flower, filled with sun, danced in the breeze through
a crack in the stone.
How could any gruesome thought find its way in through so many
friendly sensations? Bathed in fresh air and sunlight it was impossible to
think of anything but freedom; hope shone inside me like the daylight
all around, and I waited confidently for my sentence just as you wait
for liberation and life.
In the meantime my lawyer arrived. They had been waiting for him.
He had just breakfasted well and heartily. Once he sat down he leant
towards me and smiled.
Im hopeful, he said.
Are you? I replied, flippant and smiling too.
Yes, he went on. I dont know what the verdict is yet, but I expect
they will have ruled out malice aforethought, so it will only be hard
labour for life.
What do you mean, Monsieur? I replied, indignantly. Id rather it
was death, a thousand times.
Yes, death! Besides, some voice inside me said, what risk is there
in saying that? Have they ever passed the death sentence except at midnight, by torchlight in a dark dismal courtroom on a cold wet winter
night? But in August, at eight oclock in the morning on such a lovely
day, with this good, kind jury, its impossible! And I went back to
staring at the pretty yellow flower in the sunlight.
Suddenly the presiding judge, who had just been waiting for my
lawyer, asked me to stand up. The soldiers shouldered arms; as if
by electricity the whole room was on its feet at the same instant. An
insignificant, almost non-existent figure sitting at a table below the
bench  I think it was the clerk of the court  began to speak, and read
out the verdict that the jury had given in my absence. A cold sweat
broke out all over me; I leant on the wall so as not to fall over.
Counsel for the defence, have you anything to say before I pass
sentence? the judge asked.
Personally I would have had a lot to say, but I couldnt think of
anything. My tongue was stuck to the roof of my mouth.
My lawyer stood up.
I realized he was trying to mitigate the jurys verdict, and to submit,
instead of the sentence that went with it, the other sentence, the one I
had been so upset to see him hoping for.
My indignation must have been very great to show itself among the
thousands of emotions that were competing for my thoughts. I wanted
to repeat out loud what Id already said: Id rather it was death, a
thousand times. But I couldnt find the breath, all I could do was hold
him back roughly by the arm and cry out uncontrollably: No!
The public prosecutor battled with my lawyer while I listened with
bemused satisfaction. Then the judges went out, then came back in
again, and the presiding judge read out my sentence.
Condemned to death! said the crowd, and as I was led away all the
people came rushing after me with a sound like a building collapsing.
I just walked, feeling drunk and dumbfounded. Revolution had broken
out inside of me. Until the death sentence I could feel myself breathing,
quivering, living in the same world as other men; now I could clearly
make out something like a wall between the world and myself. Nothing
seemed like before. The large light-filled windows, the beautiful sun,
the clear sky, the pretty flower, they were all pale, white, the colour of a
shroud.