The Last Day of a Condemned Man
Condemned to death!young girl
I have been living with this thought for five weeks now, always
alone with it, always chilled by its presence, always bent under its
weight!
Once, because it seems years rather than weeks, I was a man like
other men. Every day, every hour, every minute had its idea. My mind,
young and fertile, was full of fancies. It liked to lay them out in front
of me one by one, non-stop and at random, embellishing the crude and
flimsy stuff of life with a never-ending stream of ornaments. There
were young girls, bishops magnificent copes, battles won, theatres full
of noise and light, and then more young girls, walks in the dark of night
beneath the spreading arms of the chestnut trees. There was always a
party going on in my imagination. I could think about whatever I liked,
I was free.
Now Im a prisoner. My body is in irons in a dungeon, my mind
imprisoned in an idea. A terrible, bloody, remorseless idea! I have only
one thought now, one belief, one certainty: condemned to death!
Whatever I do this hellish thought is always there, like a leaden ghost
beside me, alone and jealous, driving all other distractions away, face
to face with wretched me, shaking me with its icy hands whenever I try
and turn away or close my eyes. It creeps in everywhere my mind would
like to escape to, mingles with every word thats spoken to me like an
awful chorus, presses itself against the bars of my dungeon with me;
haunts my waking, spies on my spasmodic sleep, appears in my dreams
in the shape of a blade.
I have just woken with a start, hounded by it, thinking: Oh, its
just a dream! But no! Before my heavy eyelids have had time to open
wide enough to see the deadly reality that surrounds me on the damp,
dripping flagstones of my cell, in the pale glimmer of light from my
lamp, in the coarse weave of my rough canvas clothes, on the stern
face of the sentry whose cartridge pouch glints through the bars of 
my dungeon, it seems as if a voice has already whispered in my ear:
Condemned to death!
It was on a fine morning in august.
It was three days since my trial had begun, three days that my name
and crime had been drawing hordes of onlookers who swept down
onto the benches of the courtroom like crows round a corpse, three
days that the fantastical band of judges, witnesses, lawyers, crown
prosecutors had passed back and forth in front of me, now grotesque,
now bloody, always grim and deadly. The first two nights I couldnt
sleep from anxiety and dread; on the third I slept from boredom and
fatigue. At midnight I left the jury deliberating. I was taken back to the
straw in my dungeon and straight away fell into a deep sleep, a sleep of
oblivion. It was the first rest I had had for many days.
I was still at the deepest point of that deep sleep when they came
to wake me. This time the heavy tread and hobnailed boots of the
deputy jailer, the jangling of his keys, the harsh grating of the bolts
was not enough; it took his rough voice in my ear, his rough hand
on my arm to drag me from listlessness  Get up then! I opened
my eyes, sat up in alarm. At that instant, through the high narrow
window of the cell I saw, on the ceiling of the corridor outside, the
only sky it was given me to see, that yellowish play of light by which
eyes grown accustomed to the gloom of prison immediately recognize
the sun. I love the sun.
Nice weather, I said to the jailer.
For a moment he didnt reply, as if unsure whether it was worth the
cost of a word; then with some effort he muttered curtly:
Maybe.
I didnt move, mind half-drowsy, mouth smiling, eyes fixed on the
soft golden ripples that were mottling the ceiling.
Looks like a nice day, I repeated.
Yes, he replied. Theyre waiting for you.
Those few words, like the thread that stops a fly in mid-flight,
hurled me back to reality. As if in a flash of lightning I suddenly saw
the dark courtroom, the horseshoe of judges weighed down with their
blood-soaked rags, the three rows of witnesses with silly faces, the
two policemen at each end of my bench, and the black gowns bustling
about, the faces of the crowd thronging in the shadows at the back
and, fastened on me, the fixed gaze of the twelve jurors who had stayed
awake while I was asleep!
I got up; my teeth were chattering, my hands were shaking and couldnt
find my clothes, my legs were weak. With my first step I stumbled like
a porter with too much to carry. Yet I followed the jailer.
Two policemen were waiting outside the cell. They put the handcuffs
back on me. They had a small, awkward little lock that they did up
carefully. I let them: it was one machine working on another.
We went across an inner courtyard. The brisk morning air revived
me. I looked up. The sky was blue and, interrupted by the tall chimneys,
warm rays of sunlight traced patterns at the top of the tall dark walls
of the prison. It was beautiful.
We went up a spiral staircase; we passed a corridor, then another,
then a third; then a low door opened. A mixture of noise and warm
air hit me in the face: it was the breath of the crowd in the courtroom.
I went in.
As I appeared there was a mumble of weapons and voices. Benches
were shifted noisily. Partitions creaked, and as I crossed the long room
between the two blocs of the public behind walls of soldiers, it was
as if I was the central point to which the strings that made all these
gaping, straining faces move were attached.
At that moment I noticed I wasnt in irons, but I couldnt remember
when they had been taken off.
Then there was silence. I reached my seat. The moment the
commotion stopped among the crowd, it stopped in my mind too. And
suddenly I understood clearly what up till then I had only made out
confusedly, that the critical moment had arrived, that I was here to
hear my sentence.
Its hard to explain, but the way the idea came to me didnt frighten
me at all. The windows were open; the noises and the air of the town
came in from outside; the room was bright as if for a wedding; here and
there cheerful sunbeams traced the brilliant outline of the casements
along the floor, across the tables, sometimes broken up in the corners;
and from the dazzling diamond shapes of the windows each ray carved
out a great prism of golden dust in the air.
At the far end the judges seemed satisfied, presumably delighted that
they would soon be finished. In the presiding judges face, lit up softly
by a reflection from a window pane, there was something peaceful and
kind; a young assessor, carefully rearranging his bands, was chatting
away almost merrily with a pretty lady in a pink hat who had been
given a seat behind him as a special favour.
Only the jury looked pale and exhausted, but it must have been
from being up all night. Some of them were yawning. Nothing in their
expressions gave any sign that these were men who had just handed
down a death sentence; all I could make out on the faces of these good
citizens was the desire to get some sleep.
Opposite me a window was wide open. I could hear the laughter of
the flower sellers on the embankment; and on the edge of the window a
pretty little yellow flower, filled with sun, danced in the breeze through
a crack in the stone.
How could any gruesome thought find its way in through so many
friendly sensations? Bathed in fresh air and sunlight it was impossible to
think of anything but freedom; hope shone inside me like the daylight
all around, and I waited confidently for my sentence just as you wait
for liberation and life.
In the meantime my lawyer arrived. They had been waiting for him.
He had just breakfasted well and heartily. Once he sat down he leant
towards me and smiled.
Im hopeful, he said.
Are you? I replied, flippant and smiling too.
Yes, he went on. I dont know what the verdict is yet, but I expect
they will have ruled out malice aforethought, so it will only be hard
labour for life.
What do you mean, Monsieur? I replied, indignantly. Id rather it
was death, a thousand times.
Yes, death! Besides, some voice inside me said, what risk is there
in saying that? Have they ever passed the death sentence except at midnight, by torchlight in a dark dismal courtroom on a cold wet winter
night? But in August, at eight oclock in the morning on such a lovely
day, with this good, kind jury, its impossible! And I went back to
staring at the pretty yellow flower in the sunlight.
Suddenly the presiding judge, who had just been waiting for my
lawyer, asked me to stand up. The soldiers shouldered arms; as if
by electricity the whole room was on its feet at the same instant. An
insignificant, almost non-existent figure sitting at a table below the
bench  I think it was the clerk of the court  began to speak, and read
out the verdict that the jury had given in my absence. A cold sweat
broke out all over me; I leant on the wall so as not to fall over.
Counsel for the defence, have you anything to say before I pass
sentence? the judge asked.
Personally I would have had a lot to say, but I couldnt think of
anything. My tongue was stuck to the roof of my mouth.
My lawyer stood up.
I realized he was trying to mitigate the jurys verdict, and to submit,
instead of the sentence that went with it, the other sentence, the one I
had been so upset to see him hoping for.
My indignation must have been very great to show itself among the
thousands of emotions that were competing for my thoughts. I wanted
to repeat out loud what Id already said: Id rather it was death, a
thousand times. But I couldnt find the breath, all I could do was hold
him back roughly by the arm and cry out uncontrollably: No!
The public prosecutor battled with my lawyer while I listened with
bemused satisfaction. Then the judges went out, then came back in
again, and the presiding judge read out my sentence.
Condemned to death! said the crowd, and as I was led away all the
people came rushing after me with a sound like a building collapsing.
I just walked, feeling drunk and dumbfounded. Revolution had broken
out inside of me. Until the death sentence I could feel myself breathing,
quivering, living in the same world as other men; now I could clearly
make out something like a wall between the world and myself. Nothing
seemed like before. The large light-filled windows, the beautiful sun,
the clear sky, the pretty flower, they were all pale, white, the colour of a
shroud. These men, these women, these children who crushed forwards
as I went past, to me they were like ghosts.
At the bottom of the stairs a dirty black carriage with barred windows
was waiting for me. As I climbed in I glanced round the square. That
ones condemned to death! shouted passers-by, running towards the
carriage. Through the cloud that seemed to have come between me
and everything else I made out two young girls watching me avidly.
Oh goody, said the younger one, clapping her hands. Itll be in six
weeks time!
And why not? All men, I remember reading in some book or
other, of which this was the only good part, all men are condemned
to death with their sentence suspended indefinitely.* So what had
actually changed for me?
Since the moment my death sentence was passed, how many people
who had been planning to have a long life had died! How many of
them, young and free and healthy, who had been intending to come and
see my head roll on the Place de Grève had got there before me! Between
now and then, how many people, walking around and breathing in the
open air, coming and going as they liked, would still get there before
me!
Besides, what was there about life that I would I actually miss? The
dreary light, the black bread of the dungeon, my ration of thin soup
squeezed from the convicts stewpot, being roughly treated  me,
someone civilized by education  manhandled by jailers and warders,
not seeing another human being who thought me worth talking to and
who I felt the same about, constantly shuddering about what I had
done as well as what they were going to do to me  to be honest, those
were about the only possessions the headsman could take from me.
Oh what does it matter, its appalling!
The black carriage brought me here, to monstrous Bicêtre.
From a distance the building looks quite stately. It appears on the
brow of a hill on the horizon, and from a way off retains some of its
former grandeur, the semblance of a royal château. But the closer you
get the more dilapidated the palace turns out to be. The rotting gables
are painful to behold. I dont know what, but something disgraceful
and degenerate sullies the regal façade; its as if the walls have leprosy.
No more windows, no more window panes; just solid criss-crossed iron
bars to which here and there the gaunt face of a convict or a lunatic is
pressed.
Here you see life in the raw.
No sooner had i arrived than firm hands seized hold of me.
The precautions were stepped up: no knives, no forks for eating with; a straitjacket, a kind of sack made of sailcloth, gripped me
tightly round the arms; they had my life to answer for. I had lodged an
appeal. This costly business might go on for six or seven weeks and it
was important to get me to the Place de Grève in one piece.
For the first few days I was treated with a gentleness that appalled
me. Sympathy from a jailer smacks of the scaffold. Luckily, after a short
while the usual routine took over; they mixed me up with the other
prisoners in the collective brutality and stopped making unaccustomed
kind exceptions that constantly reminded me of the executioner. It
wasnt the only improvement. My youth, my submissiveness, the kind
efforts of the prison chaplain and especially the few words of Latin I
spoke to the prison supervisor, who didnt understand them, earned
me a walk with the other prisoners once a week and rid me of the
disabling straitjacket. After much hesitation I was also given ink, pen
and paper and a small reading lamp.
Every Sunday after mass they let me out into the yard at exercise
time. Here I can talk to the other prisoners; I really need that. They
are good people, the poor wretches. They tell me about their dodges;
it would horrify you, but I know theyre bragging. They teach me the
slang, to rabbit the lingo as they say. Its a whole language grafted onto
everyday speech like a sort of hideous growth, a wart. Sometimes it has
extraordinary force, an alarming and vivid irony: theres strawberry
jam on the frog (blood on the road), to marry the widow (be hung)
 as if the gallows rope was the widow of every hanged man. A thiefs
head has two names: the sorbonne, when it is contemplating, arguing
about and encouraging a crime; the crust when the executioner cuts it
off. Sometimes there is music-hall humour: a wicker handkerchief (a
rag-and-bone mans pannier), the liar (the tongue); and everywhere,
all the time, peculiar and mysterious words, ugly and squalid words
that come from who knows where: the stretch (the executioner), the
cone (death), the shelf (the place of execution). It makes you think of
toads and spiders. When you hear people speak this language its as if
something dirty and dusty, a bundle of rags, is being shaken in your
face. 
At least these men pity me, but theyre the only ones. The jailers, the
deputy jailers, the turnkeys  Ive nothing against them  laugh and
gossip, talk about me, in front of me, as if I were just an object.
I said to myself:
Since I have something to write with, why not do it? But what to
write? Stuck between four cold, bare stone walls, with nowhere for my
legs to take me, no horizon to look at, my only occupation being to
spend all day mechanically watching the slow progress of the whitish
square that the spyhole in my door projects onto the dark wall opposite
and, as I was just saying, all alone with an idea, an idea of crime and
punishment, of murder and death! Did I have anything to say, I who
have nothing more to do in this world? And what is there in my empty
withered brain worth writing about?
But why not? If everything around me is drab and colourless, isnt
there a storm, a struggle, a tragedy going on inside me? Doesnt the
obsession that has hold of me appear to me every hour, every second
in a new form, more monstrous, more bloody the nearer the final day
comes? Why dont I try and tell myself about all the violent, unfamiliar
feelings I am having in this situation of abandonment? There is
certainly no lack of material, and as short as my life may be there is
still enough in the dread, the terror, the torments that are going to fill it
from this moment till the last which can wear out a pen, run an inkwell
dry. Besides, the only way not to suffer so much from this dread is to
examine it; describing it will take my mind off it.
And anyway, maybe what I write wont be pointless. Wont this hourby-hour, minute-by-minute, torture-by-torture diary of my sufferings,
if I am strong enough to carry on until it becomes physically impossible
to do so, this story of my feelings, by necessity unfinished although
also as complete as possible, bring with it a great, profound lesson? In
this statement of dying thoughts, this ever-growing sorrow, this form
of mental post-mortem of a condemned man, is there not something
for those who pass sentence to learn? Perhaps reading this will make
them less flippant the next time it comes to tossing a thinking head,
a mans head, onto what they call the scales of justice? Perhaps these 
poor devils have never stopped to think about the slow sequence of
torment that the swift, efficient wording of the death sentence entails?
Have they ever had a moments pause at the heart-rending idea that
inside the man whose head they are severing there is a mind; a mind
that was expecting to live, a soul that wasnt the least prepared for
death? No. All they see is the downwards motion of a triangular blade,
and probably believe that for the condemned man there is nothing
before or afterwards.
These sheets of paper will put them right. If they are perhaps
published one day they will focus their attention on the sufferings of
the mind for a moment; because these are the ones they are not aware
of. They rejoice at being able to kill without causing the body almost
any suffering. But thats just the problem! What is physical pain beside
mental pain? For pitys sake, is that what laws are! The day will come,
and maybe these memoirs, a wretchs last thoughts, will have played a
part...
Unless the breeze bowls these muddy bits of paper around the prison
yard after my death, or they get ruined in the rain and are used to paste
over the cracks in a jailers broken window.
Why should what i write here be of use to others, stop judges from judging, spare unfortunates, innocent or guilty, the agony to which I have been condemned? Whats the point? What does it
matter? After my head has been cut off, what is it to me if they cut off
other peoples? Was I really stupid enough to think that? To tear down
the scaffold after Ive mounted it? What do I get out of it, I ask you?
What! The sun, the springtime, fields of flowers, birds singing in the
morning, the clouds, the trees, nature, liberty, life  none of that is for
me now!
Oh! Its me who needs saving! Can it really be true that its not
possible, that I have to die tomorrow, maybe today, that thats how it
is? O God! The terrible thought of smashing your head against the cell
wall! 
I must count up what I have left:
Allow three days after the sentence was passed for my appeal to be
lodged.
A weeks delay at the public prosecutors department of the Crown
Court, after which the papers, as they call them, are sent to the
minister.
Two weeks at the ministers office, who doesnt even know they exist,
and yet who supposedly, after going through them, passes them on to
the Court of Appeal. There they are filed, indexed, recorded  because
there is a long queue for the guillotine and everyone has to wait his
turn.
Two weeks to make sure you dont get preferential treatment.
Finally the court sits, usually on a Thursday, rejects twenty appeals
at a stroke and sends them all back to the minister, who sends them
back to the public prosecutor, who sends them back to the executioner.
Three days.
On the morning of the fourth day, as he is tying his cravat, the
deputy public prosecutor says to himself: Theres still that business
to be settled. And so if the assistant clerk of the court doesnt have
a luncheon with friends which will get in the way, the order for the
execution is drafted, drawn up, a fair copy made, dispatched, and at
dawn the next day the sound of a structure being hammered together is
heard on the Place de Grève, while at every crossroads the town criers
are yelling hoarsely at the top of their voices.
Six weeks in all. The young girl was right.
So its at least five weeks now  maybe six, I darent count  that Ive
been in this country cottage called Bicêtre, and I think Thursday was
three days ago.
I have just written my will.
Whats the point? My sentence includes costs, and everything I own
will barely cover it. The guillotine is expensive.
I leave a mother, I leave a wife, I leave a child. 
A little girl three years old, gentle, delicate, with large black eyes, and Chestnut hair.She was two years and one month old when I saw her the last time.
Thus, after my death, there will be three women without son, without husband, without father; three orphans in different degrees; three widows by act of law.
I admit that I am justly punished; but these innocent creatures, what have they done? No matter; they are dishonored, they are ruined; and this is justice.
It is not so much on account of my poor old mother, that I feel thus wretched; she is so advanced in years, she will not survive the blow; or if she still linger a short time, her feelings are so blunted, that she will suffer but little.
Nor is it for my wife that I feel the most; she is already in miserable health, and weak in mind.
Her reason will give way, in which case her spirit will not suffer while the mind slumber as in death.
But my daughter, my child, my poor little Marie, who is laughing, playing, singing at this moment, and who dreams of no evil! Ah! it is the thought of her which unmans me!
Here is a description of my prison.
Eight feet square; four walls of granite, with a flagged pavement.
To the right of the door is a kind of nook by way of alcove, in which is thrown a bundle of straw, where the prisoner is supposed to rest and sleep, dressed, winter, as in summer, in slight linen clothing.
Over my head, instead of a ceiling, is a black ogive vault, and instead of curtains, a thick canopy of cobwebs, hanging like tattered pennons.
For the rest, no windows, not even a ventilator; and only one door, where iron hides the wood.
I mistake; towards the top of the door there is a sort of window, or rather an opening of nine inches square, crossed by a grating, and which the turnkey can close at night.
Outside there is a long corridor lighted and sired by means of narrow ventilators high in the wall. It is divided into compartments of masonry, which communicate by a series of doors; each of these compartments serves as an ante-chamber to a dungeon, like mine; in these dungeons are confined felons condemned by the governor of the prison to hard labor. The first three cells are kept for prisoners under sentence of death, as being nearest to the jail, therefore most convenient for the jailer.
These dungeons are the only remains of the ancient château of Bicêtre, such as it was built in the fifteenth century by the Cardinal of Winchester, he who caused Jeanne of Arc to be burned. I overheard this description from some sightseers who came to my den, yesterday, and who stared at me from a distance, as at a wild beast in a menagerie. The turnkey had had five sous.
I have omitted to say, that, night and day there is a sentry on guard outside the door of my cell; and I never raised my eyes towards the square grating, without encountering his eyes, open, and fixed on me.
For the rest, we may suppose that there is air and daylight in this box of stone.
xi.
As there is yet no appearance of daylight, what could be done during the night? An idea just occurred to me. I would arise and examine, by my lamp, the walls of my cell. They are covered with writings, with drawings, fantastic figures, and names which mix with and efface each other. It would appear that each prisoner had wished to leave behind him some trace here at least. Pencil, chalk, charcoal  black, white, gray letters. Sometimes deep carvings upon the stone, if my mind were at ease, I could take an interest in this strange book, which is developed, page by page, to my eyes, on each stone of this dungeon. I should like to recompose these fragments of thought; to trace a character for each name; to give sense and life to these mutilated inscriptions, to these dismembered phrases.
Above my pillow there are two flaming hearts, pierced with an arrow; and beneath is written: Amour pour la vie. Poor wretch! it was not a long engagement!
Beside this, a three-sided cocked hat, with a small figure coarsely done beneath, and the words: Vive l Empereur! 1824.
More flaming hearts, with this inscription, characteristic in a prison: I love and adore Mathieu Danvin. JAQUES.
On the opposite wall is the name of Papavoine. The P is worked in arabesques and embellished with care.
A couplet of an obscene song.
A cap of liberty, cut rather deeply into the stone, with the words Bories, La Republique! beneath. He was one of the four subaltern officers of la Rochelle. Poor young man! How horrible is the idea of their fancied political necessity, to give the frightful reality of the guillotine for an opinion, a reverie, an abstraction! And I! I have complained of its severity! I who have really committed crime, who have spilled blood!
I can go no farther in my research! I have just discovered, drawn with chalk in the corner of the wall, that dreadful image, the representation of that scaffold, which even at this moment is perhaps being put up for my execution! The lamp had nearly fallen out of my hands!
I returned precipitately to sit on my straw-bed; my head sunk on my knees. Then my childish fear was dissipated, and a wild curiosity forced me to continue the examination of my walls.
Beside the name of Papavoine, I tore away an enormous cobweb, thick with dust, and filling the angle of the wall. Under this web, there were four or five names perfectly legible, among others of which nothing remained but a smear on the wall  DAUTIN, 1815.  POULAN, 1818.  JEAN MARTIN, 1821.  CASTAING, 1823. I have read these names, and frightful recollections crowded on me. Dautan was the man who cut his brother in quarters, and who went at night to Paris and threw the head into a fountain, and the body into a sewer. Poulain assassinated his wife. Jean Martin shot his father with a pistol as the old man opened a window: and Castaing was the physician who poisoned his friend; and, while attending the illness he had caused, instead of an antidote, gave him more poison. Then, next to these names, was Papavoine, the horrible madman who killed children by blows upon the head with a knife.
These, said I, as a shudder passed over me, these, then, have been my predecessors in this cell. Here, on the same pavement where I am, they conceived their last thoughts, these fearful homicides! Within these walls, in this narrow square, their last steps have turned like those of a caged wild beast. They succeeded each other at short intervals; it seems that this dungeon does not remain empty. They have left the place warm, and it is to me they have left it. In my turn I shall join them in the felons cemetery of Clamart, where the grass grows so well!
I am neither visionary nor superstitious: but it is probable these ideas caused in my brain a feverish excitement: for, whilst I thus wandered, all at once these five fatal names appeared as though written in flames on the dark wall; noises, louder and louder, burst on my ears: a dull, red light, filled my eyes, and it seemed to me that my cell became full of men  strangers to me; each bore his severed head in his left hand; and carried it by the mouth, for the hair had been removed: each raised his right hand at me, except the parricide.2
2 In France a parricide has the right hand taken off prior to execution; and all criminals about to be guillotined have their hair removed, lest the axe might be impeded, and thus cause extra suffering.
I shut my eyes in horror: and then I saw all, even more distinctly!
Dream, vision or reality, I should have gone mad, if a sudden impression had not recalled me in time. I was near fainting, when I felt something cold crawling over my naked foot. It was the bloated Spider, whom I had disturbed.
This recalled my wandering senses. Those dreadful spectres, then, were only the fumes of an empty and convulsed brain. Chimera like Macbeths! The dead are dead, these men certainly, They are safely jailed in the grave. The sepulchre is a prison from whence none escape. The door of the tomb opens not from within.
xiii.
I have lately witnessed a hideous sight.
As soon as it was day, the prison was full of noise. I heard heavy doors open and shut; the grating of locks and bolts; the clanking of bunches of keys; the stairs creaking from top to bottom with quick steps; and voices calling and answering from the opposite extremes of the long corridors. My neighbors tn the dungeons, the felons at hard labor, were more gay than usual. All Bicêtre seemed laughing, singing, running or dancing. I, alone silent in this uproar, alone motionless in this tumult, astonished and attentive I listened.
A jailer passed.
I ventured to call and ask him if there were a fête in the prison?
A fête, if you choose to call it so, answered he; this is the day that they fetter the galley-slaves, who are to set off to-morrow for Toulon. Would you like to see them? It would amuse you.
For a solitary recluse, indeed, a spectacle of any kind was an event of interest, however odious it might be; and I accepted the amusement.
The jailer, after taking the usual precautions to secure me, conducted me into a little empty cell, without a vestige of furniture; and only a grated window  but still a real window  against which one could lean, and through which one could actually perceive the sky.
Here, said he, you will see and hear all that happens. You will be alone in your box, like the king!
He then went out, closing on me locks, bolts and bars.
The window looked into a square and rather wide court, on every side of which was a large six-storied stone edifice. Nothing could seem more wretched, naked and miserable to the eye, than this quadruple façade, pierced by a multitude of grated windows, against which were pressed a crowd of thin and wan faces, placed one above the other, like the stones of a wall; and all as it were, framed in the inter-crossings of iron bars. They were prisoners, spectators of the ceremony, until their turn came to be the actors. One might have called them spirits in agony of purgatory looking into hell.
All looked in silence into the still empty court. Among these faded and dull countenances there shone, here and there, some eyes which gleamed like sparks of fire.
The block of prisons that surround the court was not complete. One of the fronts, that facing me, was cut about the middle, and was joined together by an iron grating. This grating-opened, upon a second court smaller than the first, and, like, surrounded by black walls.
All around the principal court were stone benches. In the centre rose an iron post, intended to support a lantern.
At twelve oclock, a large gateway in the court was opened. A cart, escorted by soldiers, rolled heavily into the court, with a rattling of irons. It was the convict-guard with the chains.
At the same instant, as if this sound awaked all the noise of the prison, the spectators of the windows, who had hitherto been silent and motionless, burst forth into cries of joy, songs, menaces, and imprecations, mixed with hoarse laughter. It was like witnessing a masque of demons; each visage bore a grimace, every hand was thrust through the bars, their voices yelled, their eyes flashed, and I was startled to see so many gleams amidst these ashes.
Meanwhile the galley warders quietly began their work. One mounted on the cart, and threw to his comrades the fetters, the iron collars, and the linen clothing; while others stretched long chains to the end of the court, and the captain tried each link, by striking it on the pavement; all of which took place under the mocking raillery of the prisoners, and the loud laughter of the convicts for whom they were being prepared.
When all was ready, a fellow in silver braid, who was called Monsieur l Inspecteur, gave an order to the superintendent of the prison, and two or three low doors poured forth into the court a collection of hideous, yelling, ragged men; these were the galley convicts.
Their entry caused increased pleasure at the windows. Some of them, being well known in the galleys, were saluted with applause and acclamation, which they received with a sort of proud modesty. Several wore a kind of hat of prison straw, plaited by themselves, and formed into some fantastic shape; these men were always the most applauded. One in particular excited transports of enthusiasm; a youth of seventeen, with quite a girlish face. He had just come out of his cell where he had been a week in solitary confinement. From his straw bedding he had made himself a dress, which enveloped him from head to foot; and he entered the court, jumping a somersault with the agility of a serpent. He was a mountebank condemned for theft, and there was a furious clapping of hands and a volley of cheers for him. The galley convicts responded, and there was something frightful in this exchange of compliments between those who were galley convicts and those who hoped to be.
As they arrived they were pushed between two rows of guards into the little grated courts where they awaited the visit of the doctors. It was there that all tried a last effort to avoid the journey, alleging some excuse of ill-health, sore eyes, lame leg, mutilated hand. But they are almost always found good for the galleys, and then each carelessly resigns himself to his fate, forgetting in a few minutes all his pretended infirmity.
At length, the little grating opens. A warden calls the names in alphabetical order, and they went to stand two and two, companions by similar initials; so that even if a convict had a friend, most likely their chains would divide them from suffering together! Worst of miseries!
When at least thirty have come out they close the grating. A warder drives them in line with his baton and throws in front of each a shirt, jacket and pantaloons of coarse canvas, then makes a sign and all commence to undress. An unexpected incident happens to turn this humiliation into torture.
Up to now the day had been fine enough, and, if the October breeze was rather cool, occasionally the clouds broke and allowed the sun to shine. But no sooner were the convicts undressed and at the moment when they stood naked, awaiting the inspection of the warders, a cold autumn shower suddenly fell in torrents on the uncovered heads and naked bodies of the convicts and on their miserable clothes upon the pavement.
In the twinkling of an eye the court was deserted by all except the warders and the convicts. The sightseers sought shelter under the door-ways.
Meanwhile the rain fell in sheets, a dull silence succeeded the noisy bravadoes; they shivered, their teeth chattered, and their limbs shook in the wet clothes.
One convict only, an old man, retained a sort of gayety: he exclaimed laughing, While wiping himself with his coarse shirt, This was not in the play-bill! and shook his fist at the skies.
When they had put on their traveling suits, they were taken in bands of twenty or thirty to the corner of the court where the long chains were extended. At every interval of two feet in these long chains were fastened short transverse chains, and at the extremity of each of the latter was attached a square iron collar, which opened by means of a hinge in the centre and closed by an iron bolt, which is riveted for the whole journey, on the convicts neck.
The convicts were ordered to sit down in the mud on the inundated pavement; the iron collars were fitted on them, and two prison-blacksmiths, with portable anvils, riveted the hard, unheated metal, with heavy iron hammers. This was a frightful operation, and even the most hardy turned Pale! Each stroke of the hammer, aimed on the anvil resting on their backs, makes the whole form yield: the failure of aim, or the least movement and the skull would be Crushed like a walnut-shell.
After this operation they became sombre. Nothing was heard. buts the rattle of chains and at intervals a heavy blow from a wardens baton and a cry from one of the unruly. There were some who cried; the old shuddered and bit their lips. I look with terror at all these sinister profiles in their iron frames.
Thus, after the visit of the doctors, was the visit of the warders, and after the warders, that of the blacksmiths. Three acts of this spectacle.
A ray from the sun appeared. It seemed to set fire to their brains. The convicts rose simultaneously. The five gangs joined hands, so as to form an immense circle, and thus ran round and round in the court, with a rapidity that the eye could hardly follow. They sung some couplets, in. their own idiom, to a melody which was sometimes plaintive, sometimes furious, often interrupted by hoarse cries and broken laughter, like delirious ravings: while the chains, clanking together in cadence, formed an accompaniment to a song more harsh than their own noise.
A large trough was now brought in: the guards striking the convicts to make them discontinue their dance, took them to the trough in which was swimming I know not what sort of herbs in some smoking-and dirty-looking liquid. They were to eat it.
Then, having partaken of it, they threw the remainder on the pavement, with their black bread, and began again to dance and sing. This is a liberty which is allowed them on the day they are fettered and the succeeding night.
I gazed on this strange spectacle with such eager and breathless attention, that I totally forgot my own misery. The deepest pity filled:my heart, and their laughter made me weep.
Suddenly, in the midst of a profound reverie into which I had fallen, I observed the yelling circle had stopped, and was silent. Then every eye was turned to the window which I occupied. The Condemned! the Condemned! Shouted they, pointing their fingers at me; and their bursts of laughter were redoubled.
I was thunderstruck.
I know not where they knew me, or how I was recognized.
Good-day! good-night! cried they, with their mocking sneer. One of the youngest, condemned to the galleys for life, turned his shining, leaden face on me, with a look of envy, saying, He is lucky! he is to be clipped! Good-bye, comrade!
I cannot describe what passed within me. I was indeed their comrade! The Grève is sister to Toulon. Nay, I was even lower than they were; the convicts had done me an honor. I shuddered.
Yes! their comrade! and a few days later, I would be a spectacle for them.
I remained at the window, motionless, as if paralyzed: but when I saw the five gangs advance, rushing toward me with phrases of disgusting cordiality, when I heard the horrible din of their chains, their clamors, their steps at the foot of my wall, it seemed to me that this knot of demons were scaling my cell! I uttered a shriek; I threw myself against the door violently; but there was no means of flight. I knocked, I called with mad fury. Then I thought I heard, still nearer, the horrid voices of the convicts. I thought I saw their hideous heads, appearing on a level with the window; I uttered another shriek of anguish, and fainted.
xiv
When my consciousness Returned, it was night: I was lying on a pallet; a lamp swung from the ceiling, enabled me line of beds similar to mine, and I judged that I had been taken to the infirmary.
I remained a few, moments awake, but without thought or recollection, totally engrossed by the happiness of being again in a bed. Certainly, in former days, this prison-hospital bed would have made me shrink with disgust; but I am no longer the same individual. The sheets were brown, and coarse to the touch; the blanket thin and ragged; and there was but one straw mattress. No matter! I could stretch my limbs at their ease, between these coarse sheets; and under this blanket, thin as it was, I felt the gradual decrease of horrible chill in the marrow of my bones to which I. had lately been accustomed.  I slept again.
A loud noise awakened me, at daylight; the noise came from without; my bed was beside the window, and I sat up to see from what it arose.
The window looked into the large court of the Bicêtre, which was full of people. Two lines of veterans had difficulty in keeping the crowd away from a narrow passage across the court. Between this double rank of soldiers, five long wagons, loaded with men, were driven slowly, jolting at each stone; it was the departure of the convicts.
These wagons were open, and each gang occupied one. The convicts, in consequence of their iron collars being attached to the centre chain, are obliged to sit back to back, their feet hanging over the sides of the wagon; the centre chain stretched the whole length of the cart, and on its unfastened end, the warder stood with his loaded musket. There was a continual clanking of the prisoners chains, and at each plunge of the wagon their heads and pendent limbs were jolted violently.
A fine penetrating rain chilled the air, and made their wet pantaloons cling to their shivering knees. Their long beards and short hair streamed with wet; their complexions were saturnine; they were shivering, and grinding their teeth with mingled rage and cold! But they had no power of moving: once riveted to that chain, each becomes a mere fraction of that hideous whole which is called the cordon (literally string, freely the gang). Intellect must abdicate, the fetters condemn it to death, and the mere animal must not even hunger but at certain hours. Thus fixed, the greater part half clad, with bare heads, and no rest for their feet, they begin their journey of twenty-five days; the same sort of wagons, the same portion of dress being used in scorching July as in the cold rains of November. One might say that man wished Heaven to take a part of Office of executioner.
Between the crowd and the convicts, a horrible dialogue was maintained: abuse on one side, bravadoes on the other, imprecations from both; but at a sign from the captain, I saw the sticks of the guard, raining indiscriminate blows into the wagon, on heads or shoulders; and all returned to that kind of external calm which is called order. But their eyes were full of vengeance; and their powerless hands were clenched on their knees.
The five wagons, escorted by mounted gendarmes and guards on foot, passed slowly under the high arched door of Bicêtre. A sixth followed them, in which were heaped pell-mell the cooking stoves, the copper pots and the extra chains. Some of the warders who had been delayed in the canteen came running out to join their squad. The crowd followed them: all vanished like a phantasmagoria, and by degrees the sounds of the heavy wheels on the Fontainebleau road diminished, clanking fetters, and the yells of the multitude uttering maledictions on the journey of the convicts.
And that was their beginning!
What a proposition my counsel had made! The galleys! Ah! yes, rather a thousand times death, rather the scaffold than the galley, rather the end than hell; rather give up my neck to the knife of the guillotine than to the pillory of the convict gang! The galleys, good heavens!
1 A detached footnote seems appropriate here: The manuscript of The Last Day of a Condemned bears on the margin of the first page: Tuesday, 14 October, 1828. At the foot of the last page: Night of the 25 December, to the 26th  at three oclock in the morning.
xv.
Unfortunately I was not ill. The next day I was obliged to leave the infirmary. My dungeon again received me.
Not ill! indeed, I am young, healthful, and strong; the blood flows freely in my veins; my limbs obey my will; I am robust in mind and body, constituted for a long life. Yes, all this is true; and yet, nevertheless, I have an illness, a fatal illness, an illness given by the hand of man!
Since I came out of the infirmary, a vivid idea has occupied me; a thought which affects me to madness; it is, that I might have escaped, had they left me there! Those physicians, those sisters of charity seemed to take an interest in me. To die so young! and by such a death! One would have imagined they pitied me by their pressing round my bed. Bah! it was curiosity! and then, these people may very well cure one of a fever but not of a sentence of death. And it would be so easy for them! only an open door! What difference would it make to them?
I have no chance now! My plea will be rejected, because all was legal; the witnesses gave correct evidence, the counsel pleaded well, the judges decided carefully. I do not reckon upon it, unless . . . No, folly I there is no hope. The plea is a cord which holds you suspended over an abyss, and which you feel giving way at each instant until it breaks! It is as if the axe of the guillotine took six weeks to fall.
If I could obtain my pardon!  my pardon! From whom? for what? and by what means? It is impossible that I should be pardoned. An example as they say!
I have only three steps to make: Bicêtre, the Conciergerie, the Place de la Grève.
xvi.
During the few hours I passed at the infirmary, I seated myself at a window in the sunshine, for the afternoon had become fine, and I enjoyed all the sun which the gratings of the window would allow me.
I sat thus, my heavy and fevered head within my hands, my elbows on my knees, my feet on the bar of the chair; for dejection had made me stoop, and sink within myself, as if I had neither bone nor muscular power.
The stifling odor of the prison oppressed me more than ever; I still fancied the noise from the convicts chains rung in my ears; I was almost overcome with disgust for Bicêtre. It seemed to me that the good God should take pity on me, and at least send a little bird to sing there, opposite, on the edge of the roof.
I know not if it was the good God or a demon which granted my wish; but almost at the moment I uttered it, I heard beneath my window a voice  not that of a bird, but far. better; the pure, fresh, velvet voice of young girl of fifteen!
I raised my head with a start; I listened with avidity to the song she sung. It was a slow and plaintive air, a sad yet beautiful melody; here are the words:
The following detached note in this text seems to apply to this song: 1829  We reproduce here, for persons interested in this sort of literature, the argot song, reproduced from a copy found among the papers of the condemned. The explanation of the words is written in the hand of the condemned. It is probably that, impressed by this song, but unable to remember it, he secured a copy from some one in the jail. The only thing which this facsimile does not reproduce, is the appearance of the paper, which is yellow, sordid, and crumpled.  V.H.
I heard no more and would not have been able to listen any longer. The meaning, half understood and half hidden, of this horrible lament; this struggle of the brigand with the watch, this robber whom he meets and sends for his wife  this dreadful message, Jai fait suer un chêne et ce suis enfourraillé;2 the wife who goes to Versailles with a petition, and this Majesé who indignantly exclaims that he will make the guilty man dance, la danse où il ny a pas de plancher;3  and all this sung to the sweetest air, and by the sweetest voice that ever soothed human ear! I was shocked, disgusted, overcome. It was a repulsive idea, that all these monstrous words proceeded from a fresh rosy mouth: it was like the slime of a snail over a rosebud.
2 I have sweated an oak and am put in the oven. i.e. has killed a man and is put in prison.
3 Dance where there is no floor, i.e., hung.
I cannot express what I felt; I was at once pained and gratified; the idiom of crime, a language at once sanguinary and grotesque  united to the voice of a young girl, that graceful transition, from the voice of childhood to the voice of woman. All these deformities of words, delightfully sung, cadenced, rounded!
Ah! what infamous thing is a prison! It contains a venom which assails all within its pestilential reach. Everything withers there, even the song of a girl of fifteen! If you find a bird within its courts, it has mud on its wing. If you gather a beauteous flower there, it exhales poison!
xvii.
Oh, if I could only escape, how I would fly across the fields!
No, I must not run  that would draw attention and make people suspicious. On the contrary, I must walk slowly, with my head up, humming a tune. I ought to have an old handkerchief round the lower part of my face, a blue one with a pattern in red on it. It is a capital disguise, all the market-gardeners in the suburbs wear them.
I know of a little clump of trees near Arcueil, by the side of a marsh. Once when I was at school I came there with my playmates to fish for frogs; I would hide myself there until night.
As it grew dark, I recommenced my journey. I would go to Vincennes. No, the river is in the way, I will go to Arpajon. Perhaps it would be better to go by Saint-Germain, and go to Hivre, there I could embark for England. No matter! I come to Longjumeau. A policeman passes me; he asks for my passport . . . I am lost!
Ah! hapless dreamer, first break through the three-foot wall that surrounds you! Death! Death!
I recollect when I was quite a child they brought me to Bicêtre to see the great wall, and the mad people!
xviii
Whilst I was writing this my lamp faded, daylight appeared, and the clock of the chapel struck six.
What can be the meaning of what has since happened? The jailer on duty came into my cell; he took off his cap, bowed to me, apologized for disturbing me, and making an effort to soften his rough voice, inquired what I wished to have for my breakfast.
A shudder has come over me;  Is it to lake place to-day?
xix.
It is for to-day!
The governor of the prison himself came to visit me. He asked me how he could serve or accommodate me; he expressed a hope that I had no complaint to make respecting him, or his subordinates; and he inquired with interest regarding my health, and how I had passed the night. On leaving, he called me Sir!
It is for to-day!
xx
The jailer thinks I have no cause of complaint against him or his subordinates. He is right, and it would be wrong of me to complain; they have done their duty, they have kept me safe; and then they have been complaisant at my arrival and departure. Ought I not to be satisfied?
This good jailer, with his benign smile, his soft words, his eye, which flatters and spies, his coarse heavy hands, is the incarnation of a prison! He is Bicêtre in the form of a man. Everything around me reminds me of a prison; I recognize it in everything, in the human figure, as in the iron bars and bolts: this wall is a prison in stone, this door a prison in wood, these turnkeys are prisoners in flesh and bone. The prison is a kind of horrible being complete and indivisible, half building and half man. I am its victim; it grasps me, it wraps me in its folds, it shuts me up in its granite walls, it padlocks me with its iron bolts, and it watches me through the eyes of its jailers.
Ah! unhappy wretch that I am, what is to become of me, what are they going to do with me?
xxi
Now I am calm. All is finished, quite finished! I am relieved from the dreadful anxiety into which I was thrown by the directors visit. For I confess I still felt hope.
Now, thank God! Hope is gone.This is what has happened:
At half-past six, no, a quarter to seven, the door of my cell was opened: an old man with white hair entered, dressed in a brown great coat. He unfastened it, and beneath I saw a black cassock and bands. It was a priest.
He was not the usual chaplain to the prison. This was ominous.
He seated himself opposite to me, with a quiet smile: then shook his head, and raised his eyes to heaven. That is to say to the vault of my cell. I understood him.
My son, said he, are you prepared? I answered, in a low tone:
I am not prepared, but I am ready.
Then my sight became troubled; a chill damp pervaded my frame. I felt the veins on my temples swelling, and a confused murmur in my ears. Whilst I wavered on my chair as though asleep, the old man continued speaking. At. least, so it appeared to me, for I think I remember seeing his lips move, and his hand raised.
The door was opened again; the noise of the lock roused me from my reverie, and the priest from his discourse. A person dressed in black entered, accompanied by the director of the prison, and bowed profoundly to me: he carried a roll of paper in his hand.
Sir, said he, with a courteous smile, I am an usher of the royal court at Paris. I have the honor to bring you a message from the prosecutor-general.
The first agitation was over~ all my presence of mind returned.
The prosecutor-general, said I, asks for my head at once? What an honor for him to write to me, I hope that my death will give him great pleasure, for he worked too hard for it not to be a matter of indifference to him.
I said all that, and then continued in a firm voice: Read on, sir.
He then read in a sing-song voice, a long, technically-expressed paper, the purport of which was the rejection of my plea.
The execution of the sentence will be today, in the Place de Grève, added he, when he had finished reading, without raising his eyes from the paper. We shall leave for the Conciergerie at half-past seven precisely. My dear sir, will you have the extreme goodness to accompany me?
For some instants I had no longer heard him; for while his eyes were fixed on, the paper, the director was occupied talking to the priest: and I looked at the door which they had left half open! . . . Ah! hapless me! Four sentinels in the corridor.
The usher repeated the question, looking at me this time.
When you please, I said, at your convenience.
He bowed and said:
I shall have the honor of coming for you, then, in half an hour.
Then they left me alone.
Oh! for some means of escape. My God! any means whatever! I must make my escape! I must! immediately! By the doors, by the windows, by the roof! Even though I leave shreds of my flesh on the rafters.
Oh! rage! demons! malediction! It would take months to pierce this wall with efficient tools. And I have not one nail, nor one hour!
xxii.
In the Conciergerie
Here I am transferred, then, as they say In the order.
But the journey is worth being recorded.
At half-past seven, the usher again presented himself at the threshold of my dungeon. Sir, said he, I wait for you. Alas! and I saw four others with him! I rose, and advanced one step. It appeared to me I could not make a second. My head was so heavy, and my limbs so feeble: but I made an effort to conquer my weakness, and assumed an appearance of firmness, Prior to leaving the cell, I gave it a final look; I had almost become attached to it. Besides, I left it empty and open, which gives so strange an appearance to a dungeon.
However, it will not be long untenanted. The. turnkeys, said they expected some one this evening, a prisoner who was then being tried at the court of assizes.
At the turn of the corridor, the chaplain rejoined us; he had just breakfasted.
At the threshold of the jail, the director took me kindly by the hand  he had reinforced my escort by four veterans.
By the door of the infirmary a dying old man exclaimed, Until we meet again!
We arrived in the court-yard, where I could breathe,again freely, and this refreshed me greatly.
We did not walk long in the open air. A carriage was stationed in the first court. It was the same which had brought me there. A sort of oblong van, divided into two sections by a transverse grating of close wire. Each of the two sections had a door; one in the front, one in the back of the cart. The whole so dirty, so black, so dusty, that the hearse for paupers is a state carriage by comparison.
Before I buried myself in this moving tomb, I cast a look round the yard  one of those despairing looks which seem to ask a miracle. The court was already encumbered with spectators.
Like the day when the convicts departed, there was a slight, chilling shower of the season; it is raining still, and doubtless there will be rain all the day  which will last when I am no more!
The roads were frightful, the court was drenched. I had the pleasure of seeing the crowd standing in the mud!
We entered the van. The messenger and a gendarme in the front compartment, the priest, myself, and a gendarme, in the other, with four mounted gendarmes around the carriage. Thus, not counting the postilion, there were eight against one.
As I entered it, an old gray-eyed woman who stood near exclaimed, I like seeing this, even better than seeing the galley-convicts!
I can conceive this. It is a spectacle more easily taken in at one view. Nothing divides the attention; there is but one man, and on this isolated being there is as much misery heaped as on all the other convicts together.
The van passed with a dull noise under the gateway, and the heavy doors of the Bicêtre were closed after us. I felt myself moving, but in stupor, like a man fallen into a lethargy, who can neither move nor cry out, and who fancies he feels that he is being buried alive. I listened vaguely to the peal of bells on the collars of the post-horses which drew the van, the iron wheels grating over various substances in the road, the clacking whips of the postilion, the galloping of the gendarmes round the carriage: all seemed like a whirlwind which bore me away.
Through the bars of a peep-hole in front of me my eyes were fixed mechanically on an inscription carved in large letters above the main door to Becêtre: HOSPICE DE LA FIEILLESSE.
Ha, said I to myself, it seems that there are some people who grow there, and, as my mind was so stupefied with grief, I only conceived ideas as in a dream. Suddenly the vmi changed its course and I saw the towers of Nôtre-Dame in the distance, blue and half hidden in the smoke of Paris.
At once my ideas changed from Bicêtre to Nôtre-Dame. Those who will be on the tower with the flag will see my execution well, said I to myself smiling stupidly.
I think it was at that moment that the priest addressed me again; I patiently let him speak; I had already in my ears the noise of the wheels, the galloping horses, and the postilions whip; therefore it was only one more incomprehensible noise.
I listened in silence to that flow of monotonous words, which deadened my thoughts like the murmur of a brook; and they passed before my torpid mind, always varied yet always the same, like the crooked elms we passed by the roadside. The short and jerking voice of the messenger in the front of the van suddenly aroused me.
Well, Monsieur lAbbé, said he, in almost a gay tone, what news have you to-day?
It was to the chaplain that he turned and spoke thus.
The chaplain, who talked to me without ceasing, and who was deafened by the carriage, made no answer.
Hé, hé resumed the usher, raising his voice to drown the sound of the wheels, what an infernal carriage this is!
Infernal, indeed, for I found it so.
He continued:
It is the jolting and the rumbling, no doubt, that prevents your hearing me  what was I saying? Ah! your reverence, have you heard to-days news that is exciting all Paris? ·
I trembled; was he speaking of me?
No, answered the priest, who had at last heard him, I have not had time to read the morning papers; but I suppose I shall see it all in the evening. When I am much engaged, I tell our porter to keep them for me, and I read them on my return.
Bah! replied the usher, it is impossible that you have not heard what I mean. The news of Paris  the news of this morning.
I interrupted him: I believe I know.
The usher looked at me.
You? really! and, pray what is your opinion about it?
You are inquisitive, said I.
How so, sir? replied he. Everyone should have a political opinion: I esteem you too much to suppose that you are without one. As to myself, I am quite in favor of re-establishing the National Guard. I was a sergeant in my company; and, faith! it was very agreeable to . . . 
I interrupted him.
I did not think this was the subject in question!
What did you suppose, then? You said you knew the news.
I spoke of something else with which Paris is also occupied to-day.
The fool did not understand, his curiosity was awakened.
More news! Where the deuce could you learn news? What is it, my dear sir? Do you know what it is, Monsieur lAbbé? Do let me hear all about it, I beg. I like news, you see, to relate to the president; it amuses him.
And so on. He turned to the priest, and then to me, and I only answered by shrugging my shoulders.
Well, said he, what are you thinking of?
I am thinking, said I, that I shall be past thinking this evening.
Oh, thats it, returned he. Come, come, you are too sad. Mr. Castaing conversed on the day of his execution.
Then, after a pause:
I accompanied Mr. Papavoine on his last day. He wore his otter-skin cap, and smoked his cigar. As for the young men of la Rochelle, they only spoke among themselves, but still they spoke.
Another pause, and then he continued;
Fools! Enthusiasts! they seemed to scorn the whole world. As for you, I really think you are too pensive, young man.
Young man? I repeated. I am older than you; every quarter of an hour which passes makes me a year older.
He turned round, looked at me some minutes with stupid astonishment, and then began to titter.
Come, you are joking; older than I am? why I might be your grandfather.
I have no wish to jest, I answered gravely.
He opened his snuff-box.
Here, my good sir, dont be angry. Take a pinch of snuff, and dont bear malice.
Do not fear, said I, I shall not have long to bear it against you.
At this moment the snuff-box which he extended to me ratine against the grating which separated us. A jolt caused it to strike rather violently, and it fell, wide open, under the feet of the gendarme.
Cursed grating! cried the usher.
Then, turning to me, he added:
Now, am I not unlucky? I have lost all my snuff. 
I lose more than you, said I, smiling. He had tried to pick up his snuff, muttering between his teeth:
More than I! thats very easily said. No more snuff until I reach Paris! its terrible.
The chaplain then addressed him with some words of consolation; and I know not if I were pre-occupied, but it seemed to me to be part of the exhortation of which the commencement, had been addressed to me. By degrees conversation increased between the chaplain and the officer; and I became again lost in thought.
We approached the barrier, and although I was still very pre-occupied, I noticed that Paris was noisier than usual.
The van was stopped for a minute before the toll-gate, and the inspector examined it. Had it contained a sheep or an ox, which was going to be slaughtered, they would have required some money; but a human head pays no duty! We passed.
Crossing the boulevard, the carriage trotted quickly through those old and crooked streets of the Faubourg Saint-Marceau and of the Cité, which twist and cross each other like the many paths of an ant-hill. On the pavement of these narrow streets the rolling of the wheels became so noisy and rapid, that I could hear no other sound, though that people exclaimed, as the van passed, and bands of children followed its track. I also fancied also I occasionally saw in the cross-streets ragged men displaying in their hands a bundle of printed papers, their mouths, open as if vociferating something, while the passers stopped to purchase.
The clock of the Palais struck half past eight as we arrived in the court of the Conciergerie. The sight of its wide staircase, its dark chapel, its sombre gates, made me shudder; and when the carriage stopped, I fancied the beatings of my heart stopped also.
But I collected my strength; the door was opened; with the rapidity of lightning I jumped from the, moving prison, and passed between two lines of soldiers: already, there was a crowd formed on my path.
xxiii
As I walked through the public galleries of the Palais de Justice I felt almost free and at ease, but all my resolution abandoned me when I reached the low doors, private stairs, and interior corridors, which are only entered by the condemned.
The usher still accompanied me: the priest had left me for a couple of hours; he had some business to attend to.
I was then taken to the director, into whose charge the usher gave me. They made an exchange. The director told him to wait a moment, as he had some game for him to take back in the van to the Bicêtre. No doubt it was the man condemned to-day. He is to sleep to-night on the bundle of straw which I have not had time to wear out.
Oh! very well, said the usher to the director, I will wait with pleasure; we can make out the two papers together, and it will be very convenient.
They then placed me in a small room, adjoining the directors office; and left me alone, well locked up.
I know not of what I was thinking, or how long I had been there, when a sudden and loud burst of laughter in my ear, dispersed my reverie.
I raised my eyes with a start. I was no longer alone in the cell; a man was beside me. He was about fifty-five years old, middle-sized, wrinkled, stooping and bald: with sinister cast-in his gray eyes, and a bitter sneer on his countenance; he was dirty, half-clothed, ragged, disgusting.
It seemed that the door had been opened, and he had been thrust in without my having perceived it. If death would only come thus.
We looked at each other steadfastly for some moments; he prolonging his bitter laugh, while I felt half astonished, half alarmed.
Who are you?"said I, to him at last.
That is a funny question, said he. I am a friauche.
A friauche? said I,. what do you mean?
This question redoubled his merriment.
Why cried he, in the midst of a shout of laughter, it means that the knife will play with my head in a basket six weeks hence, as it will with thine in six hours! Ha! ha! thou seemst to understand now!
Indeed I was pale, and my hair stood on end. This then was the other condemned for life, with three letters branded on my shoulder;  Ill show them to you if you like; They call that sort of justice the relapse. So here I was, a cheval de retour (return horse  sent back to the galleys). I was brought back to Toulon: this time put among the bonnets verts (Green caps  condemned for life) so now I decided to escape. I had only three wails to pierce, two chains to break, and I had one nail! I escaped. They fired the signal gun, for we convicts are like the cardinals of Rome, dressed in red, and they fire cannons when we depart! Their powder went to the sparrows! This time, no yellow passport, but then no money either: I met some comrades in the neighborhood who also served their time, or broken their chains. Their coire (chief) proposed to me to join the band, They killed on the trimar (highway). I accepted, and I began to kill, so as to live. Sometimes we attacked a diligence, sometimes it was a post-chaise, sometimes a grazier on horseback, We took the money, we let the horses go, and buried the bodies under a tree, taking care that their feet did not appear; and then we danced on the graves, so that the ground might not seem fresh broken. I grew old this way, hiding in the bushes, sleeping in the air, hunted from wood to wood, but at least free and my own master. Everything has an end, and this like the rest; the marchands de lacets (gendarmes) one night caught us at our tricks: my fanandels (comrades) escaped; but I, the oldest, remained under the claw of these cats in cocked hats. They brought me here. I had already mounted all the steps of the ladder, except one. Whether I had now taken a handkerchief or a life, was all the same for me. There was but one relapse to give me. I only had to pass the faucher (executioner). My business has been short: faith, I began to grow old and good for nothing. My father had married la veuve, (the gibbet  been hanged.) I am going to retire to the Abbay de Monte-à-Regret (the guillotine): thats all, comrade!
I remained stupefied during the recital, He laughed louder than at the beginning, and tried to take my hand. I drew back in horror.
Friend, cried he, you dont seem game. Dont flinch on the carline (scaffold). See, there is one bad moment to pass on the placarde (the Place de Grève), but thats so soon done. I should like to be there to show you the step! Faith, Ive a great mind not to plead, if they will finish me with you to-day. The same priest will serve us both. You see Im a good fellow, eh? I say, shall we be friends?
Again he advanced a step nearer to me.
Sir, I answered, repulsing him, I thank you.
Fresh bursts of laughter at my answer.
Ah! ha! sir, you must be a marquis! A marquis, at least!
I interrupted him:
My friend, I require reflection: leave me in peace.
The gravity of my tone rendered him instantly thoughtful. He shook his gray and nearly bald head.
I understand now, he murmured between his teeth the sanglier (the priest.)
After a few minutes silence, he said to me, almost timidly: Sir, you are a marquis; that is all very well;  but you have on such a nice great coat, which will not be of much use to you. The executioner will take it. Give it to me, and I will sell it for tobacco.
I took off my great coat and gave it to him. He began to clap his hands with childish joy; then looking at my shirt sleeves, and seeing that I shivered:
You are cold, sir; put on this; it rains, and you will be wet through: besides you ought to go decently on the wagon!
While saying this, he took off his coarse gray woolen jacket, and put my arms into it, which I allowed him to do unconsciously.
Then I leaned against the wall, and I cannot describe the effect this man had on me. He was examining the coat which I had given him, and uttered each moment an exclamation of delight.
The pockets are quite new! The collar is not in the least worn! It will bring me at least fifteen francs. What luck! I shall have tobacco during all my six weeks.
The door opened again. They had come for both of us; to conduct me to the room where the condemned finally await their execution: and to lead him away to Bicête. He placed himself, laughingly, amongst them, and said to the gendarmes:
I say! dont make a mistake; we have changed skins, the gentleman and I; but dont take me in his place. The devil! That wouldnt suit meat all, now that I can have tobacco!
xxiv
That old scoundrel! he took my great coat from me, for i did not give it to him; and then he left me this rag, his odious jacket. For whom shall I be taken?
It was not from indifference, or from charity, that I let him take it. No: but because he was stronger than I! If I had refused, he would have beaten me with those great hands. Ah! indeed, charity, I was full of bad:feeling.
I should like to have strangled him with my own hands, the old thief! To have trampled him under my feet.
I feel my heart full of rage and bitterness: and my nature turned to gall. Death renders one wicked.
xxv.
They led me into a cell furnished with nothing but four walls, with plenty of bars to the window and many bolts on the door; all of which was to be expected.
I asked for a table, a chair and writing materials. They brought me all these.
Then I asked for a bed, The turnkey eyed me with astonishment, and seemed mentally to say: What will be the use of it?
However they made up a chaff bed in a corner. But at the same time a gendarme came to install himself in what was my room. Are they afraid that I will strangle myself with the mattress?
xxvi
It is ten oclock.
Oh! my poor little girl. Six hours more, and I wilt be dead. I will be some senseless thing to be stretched out on a cold table in an amphitheatre; a head to be cast by one party, a trunk to be dissected by another: then all to be thrown together into a bier, and dispatched to Clamart.
This is what they are going to do with your father; by men, none of whom hate me; who all pity me, and all of whom could save me! They, are going to kill me. Do you understand that, Marie? To kill me in cold blood; a ceremonial for the general good Ah, good God!
Poor little girl! your father, who loved you so well, your father who kissed your little white neck, who passed his hands so fondly through the ringlets of your silken hair; who danced you on his knee, and every evening joined your two little hands to pray to God!
Who will do all this for you in future? Who now will love you? All children of your age have fathers, except you. How will you become accustomed to do without New Years, presents, pretty toys, bonbons and kisses. How will you, unfortunate orphan, do without food and drink?
Oh! if the jury had only seen you, my pretty little Marie, they would have understood it was wrong to kill the father of a child three years old.
And when she grows up, what will become of her? Her father will be one of the bywords of the people of Paris. She will blush for me and my name; she will be despised; rejected, reviled, on account of him who loved her with all the tenderness of his heart. Oh! my little beloved Marie. Can it be true that you will have shame and horror of me?
Wretch! what crime have I committed, and what crime will I commit against society!
Oh! can it be true that I am to die before the close of day? Can it really be that this is me? Those distant shouts which I hear, that mass of animated spectators who are already hastening to the quays, those gendarmes preparing in their barracks, this priest in the black robe, this other man with the red hands! Is it all for me? Is it I who am going to die? This same self which is here, which lives, moves, breathes, which is seated at this table, this self which I touch and can feel, and whose clothing hangs in folds here!
xxvii
If I Only knew how it is built, and in what way one dies upon it;  but it is horrible, I do not know this. The very name of it is frightful, and I cannot understand how I have hitherto been able to write and utter it.
The combination of these ten letters, their aspect, their appearance are, well calculated to awaken a frightful idea, and the unlucky doctor,who invented the thing had a name predestined for it.
The idea I attach to this hateful name is vague, undefined, and therefore more sinister. I construct and demolish in my mind continually its hideous scaffolding.
I dare not ask a question about it, yet it is dreadful not to know what it is, and how to behave upon it. It seems there is a sort of see-saw, and that you are laid on your stomach  ah! my hair will be white before my head falls!
xxviii
I had a glimpse of it once.
I was crossing the Place de Grève in a carriage, about eleven o clock one morning. Suddenly the carnage stopped. There was a crowd the square; I looked out of the window: a dense throng of men, women and children filled the square and the the neighboring streets. Above the crowd, I saw a kind of frame of red wood, which three men were building.
A criminal was to be executed the same day, and they were building the machine.
I turned away my head before seeing it. Close to the carriage there was a woman, who said to a child 
Now, look! the axe slides badly: they are going to grease the slide with a candle-end.
They are probably doing the same to-day. Eleven oclock has just struck. No doubt they are greasing the slide.
Oh! unhappy creature, this time I shall not turn away my head.
xxix
Oh! for a pardon! My reprieve! perhaps I shall be pardoned. The king has no dislike to me. Let some one seek my lawyer! Quick, the lawyer! He was right, and I should prefer the galleys. Five years of the galleys, or twenty years  or even the galleys for life, branded with the red-hot iron. But give me my life!
A galley-slave can move, come and go, and see the sunshine.
xxx.
The priest has returned.
He has white hair, a very gentle look, a good and respectable countenance, and is indeed an excellent and charitable man. This. morning I saw him empty his purse into the hands of the prisoners. How comes it then that his voice causes no emotion, and he does not ever seem affected by his own theme? How is it that he has as yet said nothing which has won on my intellect or my heart?
This morning, I was bewildered. I scarcely heard what he said; his words seemed to me useless, and I remained indifferent: they glided away like those drops of rain off the window-panes of my cell.
Nevertheless, when he came just now to my room, his appearance did me good. Amongst all mankind he is the only one to whom I am still a man, said I to myself. And I felt an ardent thirst for good and consoling words.
When we were seated, he on the chair, and I on the bed, he said to me, My son   This word opened, my heart. He continued:
My son, do you believe in God?
Yes, father, I answered him.
Do you believe in the holy Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church?
Willingly, said I.
My son, returned he, you have an air of doubt.
Then he began to speak; he spoke a, long time; he uttered a quantity of words; then when he had finished, he rose, and looked at me for the first time since the beginning of his discount; and said:
Well?
I declare I had listened to him with avidity at first, then with attention, then with devotion.
I rose, and said:
Sir, leave me for a time, I beg of you.
He asked me:
When shall I return?
I will let you know.
Then he withdrew in silence, but shaking his head as though inwardly exclaiming:
An Unbeliever.
No! low as I have fallen, I am not an unbeliever. God is my witness, that I believe in Him. But how did that old man address me? Nothing to be felt, nothing to affect me, nothing to draw forth tears, nothing which sprung from his heart to enter into mine  nothing which was addressed from himself to myself. On the contrary, there was something vague, inaccenuated, applicable iaacce, to any case, and to none in particular:. emphatic, where it should have been profound, flat where it ought to have been simple; a species of sentimental sermon, and theological elegy. Now and then a quotation in Latin; here and there, the names of Saint Augustine and Saint Gregory; and others of the calendar. And throughout he had the air of reciting a lesson which he had already twenty times repeated; seeming to go over a theme almost obliterated in his memory from being so long known. Not a look in his eyes, not an accent in his voice, not a gesture of his hands.
And how could it be otherwise? This priest has the title of chaplain of prison his business is to console and exhort; and he lives by that. Condemned felons are the spring of his eloquence. He receives confession and prays with them  because it is his place to do so. He has advanced in year in conducting men to death: from his youth he has grown accustomed to that which makes others shudder. The dungeon and scaffold are every-day matters with him. He is blasé. Probably he has a diary; one page for the galley-slaves, another for the condemned to death. He receives notice the preceding evening that he will have to attend some one the following day, at a certain hour: he asks, Is it for the galleys or an execution? and he asks no more respecting them, but comes next day as a matter of course. In this way it happens that those who go to Toulon and those who go to the Grève, are nothing to him, as he is nothing to them.
Oh! that they would bring me, instead of this man, some young curate, some aged priest, taken by chance from the nearest parish. Let them find him at his fireside, reading, and, without warning, say to him: There is a man who is going to die, and it is reserved for you to console him. You must be there when they bind his hands; you must take a place in the fatal cart, with your crucifix, and conceal the executioner from him; you must be jolted with him over the paving to the Grève; you must pass with him through that horrible crowd which is thirsting for blood; you must embrace him at the foot of the scaffold, and you must remain there until his head is here and the body there!
Then, when they have said this, let them bring him hither, agitated, palpitating, all shuddering from head to foot. Let me throw myself into his arms; then kneel at his feet, and he will weep, and we will weep together, and he will be eloquent, and I shall be consoled, and my heart will unburthen itself into his heart, and I will accept his God.
I am perhaps wrong to repulse him thus; since he is good and I am bad. Alas! it is not my fault. It is the brand of death which destroys and corrupts everything.
They have just brought me food: as though I should have need of it. A meal delicate, appetizing, a chicken, it seems, and something else. Well! I have tried to eat; but, at the first bite, everything fell from my mouth, so bitter and fetid did it seem.
xxxi
A gentleman has just entered, his hat on his head, who, hardly noticing me, took out his foot-rule and measured the stones of the walls, meantime speaking to himself aloud, sometimes saying that is it, and sometimes that is not it.
I asked the gendarme who he was. It seems that he is a sort of under-architect employed in the prison. His curiosity has awakened a slight interest in me; he exchanged a few words aside with the turnkeys who accompanied him; then fixed his eyes on me for an instant, gave his head a careless toss, and again began to speak in a loud voice and to continue taking measurements.
His task finished, he came over to me, saying, in his noisy way:
My good fellow, in six months this prison will be much improved.
And his look seemed to add:
And you will not enjoy it! so much the worse. He almost smiled. I almost expected him to jeer good-naturedly, as one jokes with a young wife on a wedding night.
My keeper, an old soldier who wears chevrons, undertook to reply:
Sir,said he, one does not speak so loudly in a death chamber.
The architect then went out.
I I remained there like one of the stones which he had been measuring.
xxxii.
And then a ridiculous thing happened. They came to relieve my good old gendarme, with whom, ungrateful egotist that I am, I did not even shake hands. Another took his place; a man with a low forehead, heavy features, and stupid countenance.
Beyond this I paid no attention, but seated myself at the table, my forehead resting on my hands, and my mind troubled by thought.
A light touch on my shoulder made me look round. It was the new gendarme, with whom I was alone.
This is about the way he addressed me: Criminal, have you a kind heart?
No! answered I.
The abruptness of my answer seemed to disconcert him. Nevertheless, he began again hesitatingly:
People are not wicked for the pleasure of being so.
Why not? answered I. If you have nothing but that to say to me, leave me in peace. What are you driving at?
I beg your pardon, criminal he answered; I will only say two words, which are these: If you could cause the happiness of a poor man, and what it cost you nothing, would you not do so?
I shrugged my shoulders.
Have you just come from Charnston? Surely, you cannot allude to me, as having power to confer happiness?
He lowered his voice and assumed a mysterious air, which ill-suited with his idiotic countenance.
Yes, criminal, yes  happiness! fortune! whispered he; all this can come to me through you. See, I am a poor gendarme; the service is heavy, the pay is light; my horse is my own and ruins me. So I put into the lottery as a counterbalance. Hitherto I have only missed by not having the right numbers; I am always very near them. If I buy 76, number 77 comes out. Have a, little patience, if you please, I have almost done. Well, here is a lucky opportunity for me. It appears, criminal, begging your pardon, that you are to be executed to-day. It is a certain fact that the dead who are destroyed that. way, see the lottery before it is drawn on earth. Promise that your spirit shall appear to me to-morrow evening, to give me three numbers, three good ones, eh? What trouble will it be to you? and I am not afraid of ghosts. Be easy on that point. There is my address: Caserne Popincourt, escalier A, No. 26, the end of the corridor. You will know me again, wont you? Come even to-night, if it suits you better.
I would have disdained to reply to such an imbecile, if a mad hope had not crossed my mind. In my desperate position, there are moments when one fancies that a chain may be broken by a hair.
Listen, said I to him, acting my part as well, as a dying wretch could. I can indeed render thee richer than the king. I can make thee gain millions  on one condition.
He opened, his stupid eyes.
What? what? I will do anything to please you, criminal.
Then instead of three numbers I promise to tell you four. Change coats with me.
Oh! is that all? cried he, undoing the first hooks of his uniform cheerfully.
I rose from my chair; I watched all his movements with a beating heart. I already fancied, the doors opening before the uniform of a gendarme; and then the prison  the street  the Palais de Justice  left far behind me!
But suddenly he turned round with indecision.
I say  it is not to get out of here?
I saw that all was lost; nevertheless, I tried one last effort, useless as it was foolish!
Yes, it is, said I to him; but as thy fortune will be made . . . 
He interrupted me.
Ah! no, indeed! stop! my numbers! To make them good, you must be dead, you know,
I sat down again, silent, and more desponding, from all the hope that I had conceived.
xxxiii.
I shut my eyes, covered them with my hands, and sought to forget the present in the past. In a rapid reverie, the recollections of childhood and youth came back one by one, soft, calm, smiling, like islands of flowers on the black gulf of confused thoughts which whirled through my brain.
I was again a child; a laughing, healthy schoolboy, playing, running, shouting with my brothers, in the broad green walks of the old enclosure dominated by the leaden dome of Val-de-Grâce, where my first years were passed.
And then, four years later, behold me there again, still a child, but a passionate dreamer. And there is a young girl in the solitary garden.
The little Spaniard, with large eyes and long hair, her dark polished skin, her rosy lips and cheeks, the Andalusian of fourteen, Pepa.
Our mothers had told us to go and run together, we had come forth to walk.
They had told us to play, but we had talked instead, children of the same age but not of the same sex.
Only the year before, we used to play, and quarrel, and dispute together. I tyrannized over Pepita for the best,apple in the orchard; I beat her for a birds nest. She cried; I scolded her, and we went to complain of each other to our mothers.
Now she was leaning on my arm, and I felt proud and softened. We walked slowly, and we spoke low. I gathered for her some flowers, and our hands trembled on meeting. She spoke to me of the birds; of the sky above us, of the crimson sunset behind the trees, or else of her schoolfellows, her gown and ribbons. We talked in innocence, but we both blushed. The child had grown into a young girl.
That evening, a summer night, we were walking under the chestnut trees, at the end of the garden. After a long silence she suddenly dropped my arm and said: Let us romp!
I can see her yet; she was all in black, in mourning for her grandmother. A childish idea had come into her head and she had said: Let us romp!
And she began to run ahead of me; she with her wasp-like waist and her little feet throwing her dress half way up her leg. I followed her; she flew; the breeze sometimes lifting her black cape, showing me her brown and shining back.
I was beside myself. I at last captured her; and, like a conqueror, took her by the belt and made her sit down on s bench. She was breathless and smiling. I was very serious, and gazed at her black eyes through their dark lashes.
Sit down there, said she, there is still daylight; let, us read something. Have you a book?
I happened to:have the second volume of the Voyages de Spallanzani with me. I drew near her, and opened it by chance. She leaned her shoulder against mine, and we began to read the same page. Before turning the leaf, she was always obliged to wait for me.My mind was less quick than hers.
Have you finished? she would ask, when I had only just commenced.
Then our heads leaned together, our hair mixed, our breath gradually mingled, and at last our lips met.
When we again thought of continuing our reading, it was starlight.
Oh! Mamma, mamma, said she on our return, if you knew how we have romped!
I was silent.
You say nothing, said my mother, you look sad.
I had paradise in my heart.
It was an evening which I will remember all my life.
All my life!
xxxiv.
The clock hadjust struck some hour, I do not know which. I do not hear the stroke plainly. I seem to have the peal of an organ in my ears. It is the confusion of my last thoughts.
At this supreme moment, when I look back over the events of life, I recall my crime with horror; but I would like to have still longer to repent it. I felt more remorse before my condemnation: since then it seems as if there were no space, but for thoughts of death. But now, how I wish to repent thoroughly. When I had lingered for a minute on what had passed in my life, and then came back to the thought of its approaching termination, I shuddered as at something new. My happy childhood! my fair youth! a golden web with its end stained! Between then and now there is a river of blood; the blood of another mingled with my own.
If any read my history, after so many years of innocence and happiness, they will not believe in this execrable year, which began by a crime, and will close with an execution; it would appear impossible.
And besides, miserable laws and miserable men! I was not ill-disposed.
Oh! to die in a few hours, and to think that a year ago, on this same day, I was innocent and at liberty, enjoying autumn walks, wandering beneath the trees tramping through the leaves!
xxxv.
To think that in this same moment, there are, in the houses which encircle the Palais de Justice and the Grève, men coming and going, laughing and talking; reading newspapers, thinking of business; shopkeepers selling their wares, young girls preparing their ball-dresses for the evening; and mothers
playing with their children!
xxxvi.
I remember once, when a child, going alone to see the belfry of Nôtre-Dame.
I was already giddy from having ascended the dark winding staircase, from having crossed the slight open gallery which unites the two towers, and. from having seen Paris beneath my feet, when I entered the cage of stone and wood-work where the great bell is hung.
I advanced with trembling steps over the ill-joined planks, examining at a distance that bell, so famous amongst the children and the people of Paris; and it was not without terror that I observed the slated pent-houses, which surrounded the belfry with inclined planes, were just on a level with my feet. Through the openings I saw, in a birds -eye view, the Place du Parvis  Nôtre-Dame beneath, and the ant-like passers-by.
Suddenly the enormous bell rang; its deep vibration shook the air, making the heavy tower rock. The flooring started from the beams. The noise nearly upset me. I tottered, ready to fall, and seemed on the point of slipping over the pent-houses, In an agony of terror, I lay down on the planks, pressing them closely with both my arms, speechless, breathless, with this formidable sound in my ears, and beneath my eyes this precipice, this profound abyss, where so many quiet and envied passers were walking.
Well! it appears to me, as if I were again in that belfry. All my senses seem again giddy and dazzled: the booming of that bell seems to press on my brain, and around me I no longer see that tranquil and even life which I had quitted, and where other men walk still, except from a distance, and beyond a terrible abyss.
xxxvii.
The Hotel de Ville is a sinister edifice. With its sharp steep roof, its bizarre clock-tower, its great white dial, its tiers of little columns, its thousand windows, its foot-worn stairways, its arches to the right and the left, it is there, on a level with the Grève: sombre and funereal, its face all:wrinkled with age, and so black, that it is black in full daylight.
On days of execution, it vomits forth gendarmes from all its doors, and stares at the condemned with all its windows.
And at night, the dial, showing the hour, is the only light on its black façade.
xxxviii.
It is a quarter past one.
The following are my sensations at present:
A violent pain in my head, my frame chilled, my forehead burning. Every time that I rise, or bend forward, it seems to me that there is a fluid floating in my head, which makes my brain beat violently against the bone.
I have convulsive tremblings, and from time to time my pen falls from my hand as if by a galvanic shock.
My eyes sting as though full of smoke.
I suffer greatly in all my limbs.
Only two hours and forty-five minutes more and I will be cured.
xxxix.
They say that it is, nothing, that one does not suffer, that it is an easy end; that death in this why is very much simplified.
Ah! then, what do they call they call this agony of six weeks, this summing up in one day? What then is the anguish of this irreparable day, which is passing so slowly and yet so fast? What is this ladder of tortures which terminates in the scaffold?
So this is not suffering.
Are not the convulsions the same whether life is taken away drop by drop, or intellect extinguished thought by thought?
And then, they say one does not suffer, but are they sure? Who told them so? Has a cut off head ever stood on the edge of the basket and cried to the people: That does not hurt!
Are there any who have been killed in this way who have come back to give thanks and say: It is a great invention. You can depend on it. The mechanism is perfect.
Was it Robespierre? Was it Louis XVI? . . .
No! less than a minute, less than a second, and the thing is done. None have ever, except in mind, been in place of the one who is there, at the moment when the heavy knife falls, cutting the flesh, tearing the nerves, and breaking the vertebrae . . . But what of it! only half a second!The pain is avoided in horror!
xl.
It is singular that my mind so often reverts to the king. Whatever I do, there is always a voice within me which says:
There is, in this same town, at this same hour, and not far from hence, in another Palais, a man who also has guards to all his gates, a man alone, like thee, in the crowd, with this difference, that he is as high, as thou art low. His entire life is glory, grandeur, delight. All around him is love, respect, veneration. The loudest voices become low in speaking to him, and the proudest heads are bent. Everything about him is gold and silk. At this moment he is holding a council of ministers, where all coincide with his opinions. Or else he thinks of the chase tomorrow  or the ball for this evening, feeling certain that the fête will come, and leaving to others the trouble of his pleasures. Well! this man is of flesh and blood like thee! And in order that at this instant the scaffold should fall, and thou be restored to life, liberty, fortune, family, it would only be requisite for him to write with this pen the seven letters of his name at the foot of a piece of paper; or even that his carriage should meet thy fatal cart! And he is good, and perhaps would like nothing better, and yet it will not be done!
xli.
Well, then! Let us have courage with death, take this horrible idea and consider it face to face. Ask what it is, seek to know what it wants, turn it over in our minds, fathom the enigma and look ahead into the tomb.
It seems to me that, with my eyes closed, I see a great abyss of light in which my spirit revels with ease. It seems that heaven will be so luminous that the stars, instead of being brilliant points of gold on black velvet, will appear like black points on cloth of gold.
Or, wretch that I am, it will perhaps be a hideous gulf, bottomless, the walls of which will be hung with black, into which I will fall, and keep falling forever. Or, on rising after the blow, I will perhaps find myself on some great damp plain, where my head will roll about. It seems now as though a strong wind drove it here and there, jotted about by other rolling heads. There will be marshes and brooks of some unknown and fetid liquid; all will be black. When my eyes, in the rolling, are turned upwards, they will see nothing but the black heavens above; they will also see, darting about in the night, little red sparks, which, on approaching will become birds of fire. And it will be thus through all eternity.
It may also happen that at certain dates the victims of the Grève will assemble on dark nights on the place which is theirs. It will be a pale and bloody crowd, and I will not escape being one of it. There will be no moon and all will speak under their breath. The Hotel de Ville will be there with its worm-eaten façade and its pitiless dial. A hellish guillotine will be there, upon which a demon will
execute an executioner; it will be at four in the morning. We in our turn will be in the surrounding crowd.
It will probably be in this way. But if the dead come back, in what shape will return? Who will have their incomplete and mutilated bodies? Will they have their choice? Will it be the head or the trunk which will be the spectre? Alas! what does death do with our soul? What is left of it? Does death sometimes lend its eyes so that it may look down on the earth and weep?
Ah! A priest! A priest who knows all this! I want a priest, and a crucifix to kiss!
My God, always the same one!
xlii.
I begged him to let me sleep; and I threw myself on the bed.
In fact, I had a rush of blood to the head, which made me sleep. It was my last sleep of that kind.
I dreamed.
I dreamed that it was night. It seemed to me that I was in my room with two or three of my friends, I do not know whom.
My wife was lying in her bedroom, asleep, beside her child.
We were talking in loud tones, my friends and I, and what we were speaking of was frightful.
Suddenly it seemed to me I heard some some in the other room; a feeble noise, strange, and indescribable. My friends had likewise heard. We listened; it was like a lock opening stiffly, like a bolt drawn carefully. It was something startling: it froze us with fear. We thought perhaps it was robbers who had got into the house, as it was far into the night.
We decided to go and investigate. I rose, and took a candle. My friends followed me, in single file.
We passed through the bedroom. My wife was sleeping with her child.
Then we came to the salon. Nothing. The portraits in their golden frames were motionless on the red hangings. It seemed to me that the door of the dining room had been moved.
We entered the dining room; we inspected it thoroughly. I went first. The door to the stairs was tightly closed, the windows likewise. Near the stove, I saw that the door of the linen cupboard was open, and was turned against the wall as though to hide something.
That surprised me. We concluded there was some one behind the door.
I put out my hand to close the door; it resisted. Astonished, I pulled harder, it suddenly gave way, and we discovered a little old woman, her hands hanging by her side, her eyes closed, motionless, and standing as though glued to the angle of the wall.
There was something hideous about her, and my hair stands on end when I think of her.
I asked her:
What are you doing there?
She did not answer.
I asked:
Who are you?
She, neither answered, nor moved, and her eyes remained closed.
My friends said:
She is no doubt an accomplice of some one who has entered with bad intent; they have escaped on hearing us approach; she was not able to, and has hidden there.
I questioned her anew; she remained motionless and silent, without a look.
One of us gave her a push, and she fell to the floor. She fell all of a heap, like a piece of wood, like a dead thing.
We kicked her, then two of us lifted her and leaned her against the wall. She gave no sign of life whatever. Some one shouted in her ear, but she was as silent as though she had been deaf.
Meanwhile, we were losing, patience, and becoming more angry than afraid. One of us said:
Put the candle under her chin.
I put the burning wick under her chin. Then she half-opened one eye; an empty, wan, frightful eye that saw nothing.
I took away the candle and said:
Ah! at last! will you answer now, old sorceress?
Who are you?
The eye closed again as before.
Really, this is too much, said the others. Again the candle! Again! she must speak.
I again held the candle under the old womans chin.
Then she opened both eyes slowly, looked at us all, one after the other, then, stooping over suddenly blew out the candle. At that very moment, in the darkness, I felt three sharp teeth pressed into my hand.
I awoke, shivering, and bathed in a cold sweat.
xliii.
She is rosy and happy, and her large eyes are bright, she is so pretty!
They had put on a dress very becoming to her.
I drew her toward me, I raised her in my arms, and placing her on my knees, kissed her hair.
Why is her mother not with her? She was very ill, and grandmother also.
She looked at me with astonishment. Caressed, embraced, devoured with kisses, she submitted quietly; but, from time to time, cast an uneasy look towards her nurse, who was crying in the corner.
At last I was able to speak.
Marie, I exclaimed. My little Mari!
I pressed her violently against my breast which was heaving with sobs. She uttered a little cry. Oh! you hurt me, sir, she said.
Sir! It is nearly a year since she has seen me, poor child! She has forgotten me, face, words, voice; and then who could know me with this beard, this dress, and this pallor! What? already effaced from that memory, the only one where I wished to survive! What! already, no longer a father, am I condemned to hear no more that word, in the language children so soft that it cannot remain in the vocabulary of men: Papa!
And yet to have heard it from that sweet mouth, once more, only once more, that is all that I would have asked in payment for the forty years of life they will take from me.
Listen, Marie, said I to her, joining her two little hands in mine. Do you know me?
She looked at me with her bright eyes and answered:
Oh, no, indeed!