The Last Day of a Condemned Man 
Condemned to death!
I have been living with this thought for five weeks now, always
alone with it, always chilled by its presence, always bent under its
weight!
Once, because it seems years rather than weeks, I was a man like
other men. Every day, every hour, every minute had its idea. My mind,
young and fertile, was full of fancies. It liked to lay them out in front
of me one by one, non-stop and at random, embellishing the crude and
flimsy stuff of life with a never-ending stream of ornaments. There
were young girls, bishops magnificent copes, battles won, theatres full
of noise and light, and then more young girls, walks in the dark of night
beneath the spreading arms of the chestnut trees. There was always a
party going on in my imagination. I could think about whatever I liked,
I was free.
Now Im a prisoner. My body is in irons in a dungeon, my mind
imprisoned in an idea. A terrible, bloody, remorseless idea! I have only
one thought now, one belief, one certainty: condemned to death!
Whatever I do this hellish thought is always there, like a leaden ghost
beside me, alone and jealous, driving all other distractions away, face
to face with wretched me, shaking me with its icy hands whenever I try
and turn away or close my eyes. It creeps in everywhere my mind would
like to escape to, mingles with every word thats spoken to me like an
awful chorus, presses itself against the bars of my dungeon with me;
haunts my waking, spies on my spasmodic sleep, appears in my dreams
in the shape of a blade.
I have just woken with a start, hounded by it, thinking: Oh, its
just a dream! But no! Before my heavy eyelids have had time to open
wide enough to see the deadly reality that surrounds me on the damp,
dripping flagstones of my cell, in the pale glimmer of light from my
lamp, in the coarse weave of my rough canvas clothes, on the stern
face of the sentry whose cartridge pouch glints through the bars of 
my dungeon, it seems as if a voice has already whispered in my ear:
Condemned to death!
It was on a fine morning in august.
It was three days since my trial had begun, three days that my name
and crime had been drawing hordes of onlookers who swept down
onto the benches of the courtroom like crows round a corpse, three
days that the fantastical band of judges, witnesses, lawyers, crown
prosecutors had passed back and forth in front of me, now grotesque,
now bloody, always grim and deadly. The first two nights I couldnt
sleep from anxiety and dread; on the third I slept from boredom and
fatigue. At midnight I left the jury deliberating. I was taken back to the
straw in my dungeon and straight away fell into a deep sleep, a sleep of
oblivion. It was the first rest I had had for many days.
I was still at the deepest point of that deep sleep when they came
to wake me. This time the heavy tread and hobnailed boots of the
deputy jailer, the jangling of his keys, the harsh grating of the bolts
was not enough; it took his rough voice in my ear, his rough hand
on my arm to drag me from listlessness  Get up then! I opened
my eyes, sat up in alarm. At that instant, through the high narrow
window of the cell I saw, on the ceiling of the corridor outside, the
only sky it was given me to see, that yellowish play of light by which
eyes grown accustomed to the gloom of prison immediately recognize
the sun. I love the sun.
Nice weather, I said to the jailer.
For a moment he didnt reply, as if unsure whether it was worth the
cost of a word; then with some effort he muttered curtly:
Maybe.
I didnt move, mind half-drowsy, mouth smiling, eyes fixed on the
soft golden ripples that were mottling the ceiling.
Looks like a nice day, I repeated.
Yes, he replied. Theyre waiting for you.
Those few words, like the thread that stops a fly in mid-flight,
hurled me back to reality. As if in a flash of lightning I suddenly saw
the dark courtroom, the horseshoe of judges weighed down with their
blood-soaked rags, the three rows of witnesses with silly faces, the
two policemen at each end of my bench, and the black gowns bustling
about, the faces of the crowd thronging in the shadows at the back
and, fastened on me, the fixed gaze of the twelve jurors who had stayed
awake while I was asleep!
I got up; my teeth were chattering, my hands were shaking and couldnt
find my clothes, my legs were weak. With my first step I stumbled like
a porter with too much to carry. Yet I followed the jailer.
Two policemen were waiting outside the cell. They put the handcuffs
back on me. They had a small, awkward little lock that they did up
carefully. I let them: it was one machine working on another.
We went across an inner courtyard. The brisk morning air revived
me. I looked up. The sky was blue and, interrupted by the tall chimneys,
warm rays of sunlight traced patterns at the top of the tall dark walls
of the prison. It was beautiful.
We went up a spiral staircase; we passed a corridor, then another,
then a third; then a low door opened. A mixture of noise and warm
air hit me in the face: it was the breath of the crowd in the courtroom.
I went in.
As I appeared there was a mumble of weapons and voices. Benches
were shifted noisily. Partitions creaked, and as I crossed the long room
between the two blocs of the public behind walls of soldiers, it was
as if I was the central point to which the strings that made all these
gaping, straining faces move were attached.
At that moment I noticed I wasnt in irons, but I couldnt remember
when they had been taken off.
Then there was silence. I reached my seat. The moment the
commotion stopped among the crowd, it stopped in my mind too. And
suddenly I understood clearly what up till then I had only made out
confusedly, that the critical moment had arrived, that I was here to
hear my sentence.
Its hard to explain, but the way the idea came to me didnt frighten
me at all. The windows were open; the noises and the air of the town
came in from outside; the room was bright as if for a wedding; here and
there cheerful sunbeams traced the brilliant outline of the casements
along the floor, across the tables, sometimes broken up in the corners;
and from the dazzling diamond shapes of the windows each ray carved
out a great prism of golden dust in the air.
At the far end the judges seemed satisfied, presumably delighted that
they would soon be finished. In the presiding judges face, lit up softly
by a reflection from a window pane, there was something peaceful and
kind; a young assessor, carefully rearranging his bands, was chatting
away almost merrily with a pretty lady in a pink hat who had been
given a seat behind him as a special favour.
Only the jury looked pale and exhausted, but it must have been
from being up all night. Some of them were yawning. Nothing in their
expressions gave any sign that these were men who had just handed
down a death sentence; all I could make out on the faces of these good
citizens was the desire to get some sleep.
Opposite me a window was wide open. I could hear the laughter of
the flower sellers on the embankment; and on the edge of the window a
pretty little yellow flower, filled with sun, danced in the breeze through
a crack in the stone.
How could any gruesome thought find its way in through so many
friendly sensations? Bathed in fresh air and sunlight it was impossible to
think of anything but freedom; hope shone inside me like the daylight
all around, and I waited confidently for my sentence just as you wait
for liberation and life.
In the meantime my lawyer arrived. They had been waiting for him.
He had just breakfasted well and heartily. Once he sat down he leant
towards me and smiled.
Im hopeful, he said.
Are you? I replied, flippant and smiling too.
Yes, he went on. I dont know what the verdict is yet, but I expect
they will have ruled out malice aforethought, so it will only be hard
labour for life.
What do you mean, Monsieur? I replied, indignantly. Id rather it
was death, a thousand times.
Yes, death! Besides, some voice inside me said, what risk is there
in saying that? Have they ever passed the death sentence except at midnight, by torchlight in a dark dismal courtroom on a cold wet winter
night? But in August, at eight oclock in the morning on such a lovely
day, with this good, kind jury, its impossible! And I went back to
staring at the pretty yellow flower in the sunlight.
Suddenly the presiding judge, who had just been waiting for my
lawyer, asked me to stand up. The soldiers shouldered arms; as if
by electricity the whole room was on its feet at the same instant. An
insignificant, almost non-existent figure sitting at a table below the
bench  I think it was the clerk of the court  began to speak, and read
out the verdict that the jury had given in my absence. A cold sweat
broke out all over me; I leant on the wall so as not to fall over.
Counsel for the defence, have you anything to say before I pass
sentence? the judge asked.
Personally I would have had a lot to say, but I couldnt think of
anything. My tongue was stuck to the roof of my mouth.
My lawyer stood up.
I realized he was trying to mitigate the jurys verdict, and to submit,
instead of the sentence that went with it, the other sentence, the one I
had been so upset to see him hoping for.
My indignation must have been very great to show itself among the
thousands of emotions that were competing for my thoughts. I wanted
to repeat out loud what Id already said: Id rather it was death, a
thousand times. But I couldnt find the breath, all I could do was hold
him back roughly by the arm and cry out uncontrollably: No!
The public prosecutor battled with my lawyer while I listened with
bemused satisfaction. Then the judges went out, then came back in
again, and the presiding judge read out my sentence.
Condemned to death! said the crowd, and as I was led away all the
people came rushing after me with a sound like a building collapsing.
I just walked, feeling drunk and dumbfounded. Revolution had broken
out inside of me. Until the death sentence I could feel myself breathing,
quivering, living in the same world as other men; now I could clearly
make out something like a wall between the world and myself. Nothing
seemed like before. The large light-filled windows, the beautiful sun,
the clear sky, the pretty flower, they were all pale, white, the colour of a
shroud. These men, these women, these children who crushed forwards
as I went past, to me they were like ghosts.
At the bottom of the stairs a dirty black carriage with barred windows
was waiting for me. As I climbed in I glanced round the square. That
ones condemned to death! shouted passers-by, running towards the
carriage. Through the cloud that seemed to have come between me
and everything else I made out two young girls watching me avidly.
Oh goody, said the younger one, clapping her hands. Itll be in six
weeks time!
And why not? All men, I remember reading in some book or
other, of which this was the only good part, all men are condemned
to death with their sentence suspended indefinitely.* So what had
actually changed for me?
Since the moment my death sentence was passed, how many people
who had been planning to have a long life had died! How many of
them, young and free and healthy, who had been intending to come and
see my head roll on the Place de Grève had got there before me! Between
now and then, how many people, walking around and breathing in the
open air, coming and going as they liked, would still get there before
me!
Besides, what was there about life that I would I actually miss? The
dreary light, the black bread of the dungeon, my ration of thin soup
squeezed from the convicts stewpot, being roughly treated  me,
someone civilized by education  manhandled by jailers and warders,
not seeing another human being who thought me worth talking to and
who I felt the same about, constantly shuddering about what I had
done as well as what they were going to do to me  to be honest, those
were about the only possessions the headsman could take from me.
Oh what does it matter, its appalling!
The black carriage brought me here, to monstrous Bicêtre.
From a distance the building looks quite stately. It appears on the
brow of a hill on the horizon, and from a way off retains some of its
former grandeur, the semblance of a royal château. But the closer you
get the more dilapidated the palace turns out to be. The rotting gables
are painful to behold. I dont know what, but something disgraceful
and degenerate sullies the regal façade; its as if the walls have leprosy.
No more windows, no more window panes; just solid criss-crossed iron
bars to which here and there the gaunt face of a convict or a lunatic is
pressed.
Here you see life in the raw.
No sooner had i arrived than firm hands seized hold of me.
The precautions were stepped up: no knives, no forks for eating with; a straitjacket, a kind of sack made of sailcloth, gripped me
tightly round the arms; they had my life to answer for. I had lodged an
appeal. This costly business might go on for six or seven weeks and it
was important to get me to the Place de Grève in one piece.
For the first few days I was treated with a gentleness that appalled
me. Sympathy from a jailer smacks of the scaffold. Luckily, after a short
while the usual routine took over; they mixed me up with the other
prisoners in the collective brutality and stopped making unaccustomed
kind exceptions that constantly reminded me of the executioner. It
wasnt the only improvement. My youth, my submissiveness, the kind
efforts of the prison chaplain and especially the few words of Latin I
spoke to the prison supervisor, who didnt understand them, earned
me a walk with the other prisoners once a week and rid me of the
disabling straitjacket. After much hesitation I was also given ink, pen
and paper and a small reading lamp.
Every Sunday after mass they let me out into the yard at exercise
time. Here I can talk to the other prisoners; I really need that. They
are good people, the poor wretches. They tell me about their dodges;
it would horrify you, but I know theyre bragging. They teach me the
slang, to rabbit the lingo as they say. Its a whole language grafted onto
everyday speech like a sort of hideous growth, a wart. Sometimes it has
extraordinary force, an alarming and vivid irony: theres strawberry
jam on the frog (blood on the road), to marry the widow (be hung)
 as if the gallows rope was the widow of every hanged man. A thiefs
head has two names: the sorbonne, when it is contemplating, arguing
about and encouraging a crime; the crust when the executioner cuts it
off. Sometimes there is music-hall humour: a wicker handkerchief (a
rag-and-bone mans pannier), the liar (the tongue); and everywhere,
all the time, peculiar and mysterious words, ugly and squalid words
that come from who knows where: the stretch (the executioner), the
cone (death), the shelf (the place of execution). It makes you think of
toads and spiders. When you hear people speak this language its as if
something dirty and dusty, a bundle of rags, is being shaken in your
face. 
At least these men pity me, but theyre the only ones. The jailers, the
deputy jailers, the turnkeys  Ive nothing against them  laugh and
gossip, talk about me, in front of me, as if I were just an object.
I said to myself:
Since I have something to write with, why not do it? But what to
write? Stuck between four cold, bare stone walls, with nowhere for my
legs to take me, no horizon to look at, my only occupation being to
spend all day mechanically watching the slow progress of the whitish
square that the spyhole in my door projects onto the dark wall opposite
and, as I was just saying, all alone with an idea, an idea of crime and
punishment, of murder and death! Did I have anything to say, I who
have nothing more to do in this world? And what is there in my empty
withered brain worth writing about?
But why not? If everything around me is drab and colourless, isnt
there a storm, a struggle, a tragedy going on inside me? Doesnt the
obsession that has hold of me appear to me every hour, every second
in a new form, more monstrous, more bloody the nearer the final day
comes? Why dont I try and tell myself about all the violent, unfamiliar
feelings I am having in this situation of abandonment? There is
certainly no lack of material, and as short as my life may be there is
still enough in the dread, the terror, the torments that are going to fill it
from this moment till the last which can wear out a pen, run an inkwell
dry. Besides, the only way not to suffer so much from this dread is to
examine it; describing it will take my mind off it.
And anyway, maybe what I write wont be pointless. Wont this hourby-hour, minute-by-minute, torture-by-torture diary of my sufferings,
if I am strong enough to carry on until it becomes physically impossible
to do so, this story of my feelings, by necessity unfinished although
also as complete as possible, bring with it a great, profound lesson? In
this statement of dying thoughts, this ever-growing sorrow, this form
of mental post-mortem of a condemned man, is there not something
for those who pass sentence to learn? Perhaps reading this will make
them less flippant the next time it comes to tossing a thinking head,
a mans head, onto what they call the scales of justice? Perhaps these 
poor devils have never stopped to think about the slow sequence of
torment that the swift, efficient wording of the death sentence entails?
Have they ever had a moments pause at the heart-rending idea that
inside the man whose head they are severing there is a mind; a mind
that was expecting to live, a soul that wasnt the least prepared for
death? No. All they see is the downwards motion of a triangular blade,
and probably believe that for the condemned man there is nothing
before or afterwards.
These sheets of paper will put them right. If they are perhaps
published one day they will focus their attention on the sufferings of
the mind for a moment; because these are the ones they are not aware
of. They rejoice at being able to kill without causing the body almost
any suffering. But thats just the problem! What is physical pain beside
mental pain? For pitys sake, is that what laws are! The day will come,
and maybe these memoirs, a wretchs last thoughts, will have played a
part...
Unless the breeze bowls these muddy bits of paper around the prison
yard after my death, or they get ruined in the rain and are used to paste
over the cracks in a jailers broken window.
Why should what i write here be of use to others, stop judges from judging, spare unfortunates, innocent or guilty, the agony to which I have been condemned? Whats the point? What does it
matter? After my head has been cut off, what is it to me if they cut off
other peoples? Was I really stupid enough to think that? To tear down
the scaffold after Ive mounted it? What do I get out of it, I ask you?
What! The sun, the springtime, fields of flowers, birds singing in the
morning, the clouds, the trees, nature, liberty, life  none of that is for
me now!
Oh! Its me who needs saving! Can it really be true that its not
possible, that I have to die tomorrow, maybe today, that thats how it
is? O God! The terrible thought of smashing your head against the cell
wall! 
I must count up what I have left:
Allow three days after the sentence was passed for my appeal to be
lodged.
A weeks delay at the public prosecutors department of the Crown
Court, after which the papers, as they call them, are sent to the
minister.
Two weeks at the ministers office, who doesnt even know they exist,
and yet who supposedly, after going through them, passes them on to
the Court of Appeal. There they are filed, indexed, recorded  because
there is a long queue for the guillotine and everyone has to wait his
turn.
Two weeks to make sure you dont get preferential treatment.
Finally the court sits, usually on a Thursday, rejects twenty appeals
at a stroke and sends them all back to the minister, who sends them
back to the public prosecutor, who sends them back to the executioner.
Three days.
On the morning of the fourth day, as he is tying his cravat, the
deputy public prosecutor says to himself: Theres still that business
to be settled. And so if the assistant clerk of the court doesnt have
a luncheon with friends which will get in the way, the order for the
execution is drafted, drawn up, a fair copy made, dispatched, and at
dawn the next day the sound of a structure being hammered together is
heard on the Place de Grève, while at every crossroads the town criers
are yelling hoarsely at the top of their voices.
Six weeks in all. The young girl was right.
So its at least five weeks now  maybe six, I darent count  that Ive
been in this country cottage called Bicêtre, and I think Thursday was
three days ago.
I have just written my will.
Whats the point? My sentence includes costs, and everything I own
will barely cover it. The guillotine is expensive.
I leave a mother, I leave a wife, I leave a child. 
A little girl three years old, gentle, delicate, with large black eyes, and Chestnut hair.She was two years and one month old when I saw her the last time.
Thus, after my death, there will be three women without son, without husband, without father; three orphans in different degrees; three widows by act of law.
I admit that I am justly punished; but these innocent creatures, what have they done? No matter; they are dishonored, they are ruined; and this is justice.
It is not so much on account of my poor old mother, that I feel thus wretched; she is so advanced in years, she will not survive the blow; or if she still linger a short time, her feelings are so blunted, that she will suffer but little.
Nor is it for my wife that I feel the most; she is already in miserable health, and weak in mind.
Her reason will give way, in which case her spirit will not suffer while the mind slumber as in death.
But my daughter, my child, my poor little Marie, who is laughing, playing, singing at this moment, and who dreams of no evil! Ah! it is the thought of her which unmans me!
Here is a description of my prison.
Eight feet square; four walls of granite, with a flagged pavement.
To the right of the door is a kind of nook by way of alcove, in which is thrown a bundle of straw, where the prisoner is supposed to rest and sleep, dressed, winter, as in summer, in slight linen clothing.
Over my head, instead of a ceiling, is a black ogive vault, and instead of curtains, a thick canopy of cobwebs, hanging like tattered pennons.
For the rest, no windows, not even a ventilator; and only one door, where iron hides the wood.
I mistake; towards the top of the door there is a sort of window, or rather an opening of nine inches square, crossed by a grating, and which the turnkey can close at night.
Outside there is a long corridor lighted and sired by means of narrow ventilators high in the wall. It is divided into compartments of masonry, which communicate by a series of doors; each of these compartments serves as an ante-chamber to a dungeon, like mine; in these dungeons are confined felons condemned by the governor of the prison to hard labor. The first three cells are kept for prisoners under sentence of death, as being nearest to the jail, therefore most convenient for the jailer.
These dungeons are the only remains of the ancient château of Bicêtre, such as it was built in the fifteenth century by the Cardinal of Winchester, he who caused Jeanne of Arc to be burned. I overheard this description from some sightseers who came to my den, yesterday, and who stared at me from a distance, as at a wild beast in a menagerie. The turnkey had had five sous.
I have omitted to say, that, night and day there is a sentry on guard outside the door of my cell; and I never raised my eyes towards the square grating, without encountering his eyes, open, and fixed on me.
For the rest, we may suppose that there is air and daylight in this box of stone.
xi.
As there is yet no appearance of daylight, what could be done during the night? An idea just occurred to me. I would arise and examine, by my lamp, the walls of my cell. They are covered with writings, with drawings, fantastic figures, and names which mix with and efface each other. It would appear that each prisoner had wished to leave behind him some trace here at least. Pencil, chalk, charcoal  black, white, gray letters. Sometimes deep carvings upon the stone, if my mind were at ease, I could take an interest in this strange book, which is developed, page by page, to my eyes, on each stone of this dungeon. I should like to recompose these fragments of thought; to trace a character for each name; to give sense and life to these mutilated inscriptions, to these dismembered phrases.
Above my pillow there are two flaming hearts, pierced with an arrow; and beneath is written: Amour pour la vie. Poor wretch! it was not a long engagement!
Beside this, a three-sided cocked hat, with a small figure coarsely done beneath, and the words: Vive l Empereur! 1824.
More flaming hearts, with this inscription, characteristic in a prison: I love and adore Mathieu Danvin. JAQUES.
On the opposite wall is the name of Papavoine. The P is worked in arabesques and embellished with care.
A couplet of an obscene song.
A cap of liberty, cut rather deeply into the stone, with the words Bories, La Republique! beneath. He was one of the four subaltern officers of la Rochelle. Poor young man! How horrible is the idea of their fancied political necessity, to give the frightful reality of the guillotine for an opinion, a reverie, an abstraction! And I! I have complained of its severity! I who have really committed crime, who have spilled blood!
I can go no farther in my research! I have just discovered, drawn with chalk in the corner of the wall, that dreadful image, the representation of that scaffold, which even at this moment is perhaps being put up for my execution! The lamp had nearly fallen out of my hands!
I returned precipitately to sit on my straw-bed; my head sunk on my knees. Then my childish fear was dissipated, and a wild curiosity forced me to continue the examination of my walls.
Beside the name of Papavoine, I tore away an enormous cobweb, thick with dust, and filling the angle of the wall. Under this web, there were four or five names perfectly legible, among others of which nothing remained but a smear on the wall  DAUTIN, 1815.  POULAN, 1818.  JEAN MARTIN, 1821.  CASTAING, 1823. I have read these names, and frightful recollections crowded on me. Dautan was the man who cut his brother in quarters, and who went at night to Paris and threw the head into a fountain, and the body into a sewer. Poulain assassinated his wife. Jean Martin shot his father with a pistol as the old man opened a window: and Castaing was the physician who poisoned his friend; and, while attending the illness he had caused, instead of an antidote, gave him more poison. Then, next to these names, was Papavoine, the horrible madman who killed children by blows upon the head with a knife.
These, said I, as a shudder passed over me, these, then, have been my predecessors in this cell. Here, on the same pavement where I am, they conceived their last thoughts, these fearful homicides! Within these walls, in this narrow square, their last steps have turned like those of a caged wild beast. They succeeded each other at short intervals; it seems that this dungeon does not remain empty. They have left the place warm, and it is to me they have left it. In my turn I shall join them in the felons cemetery of Clamart, where the grass grows so well!
I am neither visionary nor superstitious: but it is probable these ideas caused in my brain a feverish excitement: for, whilst I thus wandered, all at once these five fatal names appeared as though written in flames on the dark wall; noises, louder and louder, burst on my ears: a dull, red light, filled my eyes, and it seemed to me that my cell became full of men  strangers to me; each bore his severed head in his left hand; and carried it by the mouth, for the hair had been removed: each raised his right hand at me, except the parricide.2
2 In France a parricide has the right hand taken off prior to execution; and all criminals about to be guillotined have their hair removed, lest the axe might be impeded, and thus cause extra suffering.
I shut my eyes in horror: and then I saw all, even more distinctly!
Dream, vision or reality, I should have gone mad, if a sudden impression had not recalled me in time. I was near fainting, when I felt something cold crawling over my naked foot. It was the bloated Spider, whom I had disturbed.
This recalled my wandering senses. Those dreadful spectres, then, were only the fumes of an empty and convulsed brain. Chimera like Macbeths! The dead are dead, these men certainly, They are safely jailed in the grave. The sepulchre is a prison from whence none escape. The door of the tomb opens not from within.
xiii.
I have lately witnessed a hideous sight.
As soon as it was day, the prison was full of noise. I heard heavy doors open and shut; the grating of locks and bolts; the clanking of bunches of keys; the stairs creaking from top to bottom with quick steps; and voices calling and answering from the opposite extremes of the long corridors. My neighbors tn the dungeons, the felons at hard labor, were more gay than usual. All Bicêtre seemed laughing, singing, running or dancing. I, alone silent in this uproar, alone motionless in this tumult, astonished and attentive I listened.
A jailer passed.
I ventured to call and ask him if there were a fête in the prison?
A fête, if you choose to call it so, answered he; this is the day that they fetter the galley-slaves, who are to set off to-morrow for Toulon. Would you like to see them? It would amuse you.
For a solitary recluse, indeed, a spectacle of any kind was an event of interest, however odious it might be; and I accepted the amusement.
The jailer, after taking the usual precautions to secure me, conducted me into a little empty cell, without a vestige of furniture; and only a grated window  but still a real window  against which one could lean, and through which one could actually perceive the sky.
Here, said he, you will see and hear all that happens. You will be alone in your box, like the king!
He then went out, closing on me locks, bolts and bars.
The window looked into a square and rather wide court, on every side of which was a large six-storied stone edifice. Nothing could seem more wretched, naked and miserable to the eye, than this quadruple façade, pierced by a multitude of grated windows, against which were pressed a crowd of thin and wan faces, placed one above the other, like the stones of a wall; and all as it were, framed in the inter-crossings of iron bars. They were prisoners, spectators of the ceremony, until their turn came to be the actors. One might have called them spirits in agony of purgatory looking into hell.
All looked in silence into the still empty court. Among these faded and dull countenances there shone, here and there, some eyes which gleamed like sparks of fire.
The block of prisons that surround the court was not complete. One of the fronts, that facing me, was cut about the middle, and was joined together by an iron grating. This grating-opened, upon a second court smaller than the first, and, like, surrounded by black walls.
All around the principal court were stone benches. In the centre rose an iron post, intended to support a lantern.
At twelve oclock, a large gateway in the court was opened. A cart, escorted by soldiers, rolled heavily into the court, with a rattling of irons. It was the convict-guard with the chains.
At the same instant, as if this sound awaked all the noise of the prison, the spectators of the windows, who had hitherto been silent and motionless, burst forth into cries of joy, songs, menaces, and imprecations, mixed with hoarse laughter. It was like witnessing a masque of demons; each visage bore a grimace, every hand was thrust through the bars, their voices yelled, their eyes flashed, and I was startled to see so many gleams amidst these ashes.
Meanwhile the galley warders quietly began their work. One mounted on the cart, and threw to his comrades the fetters, the iron collars, and the linen clothing; while others stretched long chains to the end of the court, and the captain tried each link, by striking it on the pavement; all of which took place under the mocking raillery of the prisoners, and the loud laughter of the convicts for whom they were being prepared.
When all was ready, a fellow in silver braid, who was called Monsieur l Inspecteur, gave an order to the superintendent of the prison, and two or three low doors poured forth into the court a collection of hideous, yelling, ragged men; these were the galley convicts.
Their entry caused increased pleasure at the windows. Some of them, being well known in the galleys, were saluted with applause and acclamation, which they received with a sort of proud modesty. Several wore a kind of hat of prison straw, plaited by themselves, and formed into some fantastic shape; these men were always the most applauded. One in particular excited transports of enthusiasm; a youth of seventeen, with quite a girlish face. He had just come out of his cell where he had been a week in solitary confinement. From his straw bedding he had made himself a dress, which enveloped him from head to foot; and he entered the court, jumping a somersault with the agility of a serpent. He was a mountebank condemned for theft, and there was a furious clapping of hands and a volley of cheers for him. The galley convicts responded, and there was something frightful in this exchange of compliments between those who were galley convicts and those who hoped to be.
As they arrived they were pushed between two rows of guards into the little grated courts where they awaited the visit of the doctors. It was there that all tried a last effort to avoid the journey, alleging some excuse of ill-health, sore eyes, lame leg, mutilated hand. But they are almost always found good for the galleys, and then each carelessly resigns himself to his fate, forgetting in a few minutes all his pretended infirmity.
At length, the little grating opens. A warden calls the names in alphabetical order, and they went to stand two and two, companions by similar initials; so that even if a convict had a friend, most likely their chains would divide them from suffering together! Worst of miseries!
When at least thirty have come out they close the grating. A warder drives them in line with his baton and throws in front of each a shirt, jacket and pantaloons of coarse canvas, then makes a sign and all commence to undress. An unexpected incident happens to turn this humiliation into torture.
Up to now the day had been fine enough, and, if the October breeze was rather cool, occasionally the clouds broke and allowed the sun to shine. But no sooner were the convicts undressed and at the moment when they stood naked, awaiting the inspection of the warders, a cold autumn shower suddenly fell in torrents on the uncovered heads and naked bodies of the convicts and on their miserable clothes upon the pavement.
In the twinkling of an eye the court was deserted by all except the warders and the convicts. The sightseers sought shelter under the door-ways.
Meanwhile the rain fell in sheets, a dull silence succeeded the noisy bravadoes; they shivered, their teeth chattered, and their limbs shook in the wet clothes.
One convict only, an old man, retained a sort of gayety: he exclaimed laughing, While wiping himself with his coarse shirt, This was not in the play-bill! and shook his fist at the skies.
When they had put on their traveling suits, they were taken in bands of twenty or thirty to the corner of the court where the long chains were extended. At every interval of two feet in these long chains were fastened short transverse chains, and at the extremity of each of the latter was attached a square iron collar, which opened by means of a hinge in the centre and closed by an iron bolt, which is riveted for the whole journey, on the convicts neck.
The convicts were ordered to sit down in the mud on the inundated pavement; the iron collars were fitted on them, and two prison-blacksmiths, with portable anvils, riveted the hard, unheated metal, with heavy iron hammers. This was a frightful operation, and even the most hardy turned Pale! Each stroke of the hammer, aimed on the anvil resting on their backs, makes the whole form yield: the failure of aim, or the least movement and the skull would be Crushed like a walnut-shell.
After this operation they became sombre. Nothing was heard. buts the rattle of chains and at intervals a heavy blow from a wardens baton and a cry from one of the unruly. There were some who cried; the old shuddered and bit their lips. I look with terror at all these sinister profiles in their iron frames.
Thus, after the visit of the doctors, was the visit of the warders, and after the warders, that of the blacksmiths. Three acts of this spectacle.
A ray from the sun appeared. It seemed to set fire to their brains. The convicts rose simultaneously. The five gangs joined hands, so as to form an immense circle, and thus ran round and round in the court, with a rapidity that the eye could hardly follow. They sung some couplets, in. their own idiom, to a melody which was sometimes plaintive, sometimes furious, often interrupted by hoarse cries and broken laughter, like delirious ravings: while the chains, clanking together in cadence, formed an accompaniment to a song more harsh than their own noise.
A large trough was now brought in: the guards striking the convicts to make them discontinue their dance, took them to the trough in which was swimming I know not what sort of herbs in some smoking-and dirty-looking liquid. They were to eat it.
Then, having partaken of it, they threw the remainder on the pavement, with their black bread, and began again to dance and sing. This is a liberty which is allowed them on the day they are fettered and the succeeding night.
I gazed on this strange spectacle with such eager and breathless attention, that I totally forgot my own misery. The deepest pity filled:my heart, and their laughter made me weep.
Suddenly, in the midst of a profound reverie into which I had fallen, I observed the yelling circle had stopped, and was silent. Then every eye was turned to the window which I occupied. The Condemned! the Condemned! Shouted they, pointing their fingers at me; and their bursts of laughter were redoubled.
I was thunderstruck.
I know not where they knew me, or how I was recognized.
Good-day! good-night! cried they, with their mocking sneer. One of the youngest, condemned to the galleys for life, turned his shining, leaden face on me, with a look of envy, saying, He is lucky! he is to be clipped! Good-bye, comrade!
I cannot describe what passed within me. I was indeed their comrade! The Grève is sister to Toulon. Nay, I was even lower than they were; the convicts had done me an honor. I shuddered.
Yes! their comrade! and a few days later, I would be a spectacle for them.
I remained at the window, motionless, as if paralyzed: but when I saw the five gangs advance, rushing toward me with phrases of disgusting cordiality, when I heard the horrible din of their chains, their clamors, their steps at the foot of my wall, it seemed to me that this knot of demons were scaling my cell! I uttered a shriek; I threw myself against the door violently; but there was no means of flight. I knocked, I called with mad fury. Then I thought I heard, still nearer, the horrid voices of the convicts. I thought I saw their hideous heads, appearing on a level with the window; I uttered another shriek of anguish, and fainted.
xiv
When my consciousness Returned, it was night: I was lying on a pallet; a lamp swung from the ceiling, enabled me line of beds similar to mine, and I judged that I had been taken to the infirmary.
I remained a few, moments awake, but without thought or recollection, totally engrossed by the happiness of being again in a bed. Certainly, in former days, this prison-hospital bed would have made me shrink with disgust; but I am no longer the same individual. The sheets were brown, and coarse to the touch; the blanket thin and ragged; and there was but one straw mattress. No matter! I could stretch my limbs at their ease, between these coarse sheets; and under this blanket, thin as it was, I felt the gradual decrease of horrible chill in the marrow of my bones to which I. had lately been accustomed.  I slept again.
A loud noise awakened me, at daylight; the noise came from without; my bed was beside the window, and I sat up to see from what it arose.
The window looked into the large court of the Bicêtre, which was full of people. Two lines of veterans had difficulty in keeping the crowd away from a narrow passage across the court. Between this double rank of soldiers, five long wagons, loaded with men, were driven slowly, jolting at each stone; it was the departure of the convicts.
These wagons were open, and each gang occupied one. The convicts, in consequence of their iron collars being attached to the centre chain, are obliged to sit back to back, their feet hanging over the sides of the wagon; the centre chain stretched the whole length of the cart, and on its unfastened end, the warder stood with his loaded musket. There was a continual clanking of the prisoners chains, and at each plunge of the wagon their heads and pendent limbs were jolted violently.
A fine penetrating rain chilled the air, and made their wet pantaloons cling to their shivering knees. Their long beards and short hair streamed with wet; their complexions were saturnine; they were shivering, and grinding their teeth with mingled rage and cold! But they had no power of moving: once riveted to that chain, each becomes a mere fraction of that hideous whole which is called the cordon (literally string, freely the gang). Intellect must abdicate, the fetters condemn it to death, and the mere animal must not even hunger but at certain hours. Thus fixed, the greater part half clad, with bare heads, and no rest for their feet, they begin their journey of twenty-five days; the same sort of wagons, the same portion of dress being used in scorching July as in the cold rains of November. One might say that man wished Heaven to take a part of Office of executioner.
Between the crowd and the convicts, a horrible dialogue was maintained: abuse on one side, bravadoes on the other, imprecations from both; but at a sign from the captain, I saw the sticks of the guard, raining indiscriminate blows into the wagon, on heads or shoulders; and all returned to that kind of external calm which is called order. But their eyes were full of vengeance; and their powerless hands were clenched on their knees.
The five wagons, escorted by mounted gendarmes and guards on foot, passed slowly under the high arched door of Bicêtre. A sixth followed them, in which were heaped pell-mell the cooking stoves, the copper pots and the extra chains. Some of the warders who had been delayed in the canteen came running out to join their squad. The crowd followed them: all vanished like a phantasmagoria, and by degrees the sounds of the heavy wheels on the Fontainebleau road diminished, clanking fetters, and the yells of the multitude uttering maledictions on the journey of the convicts.
And that was their beginning!
What a proposition my counsel had made! The galleys! Ah! yes, rather a thousand times death, rather the scaffold than the galley, rather the end than hell; rather give up my neck to the knife of the guillotine than to the pillory of the convict gang! The galleys, good heavens!
1 A detached footnote seems appropriate here: The manuscript of The Last Day of a Condemned bears on the margin of the first page: Tuesday, 14 October, 1828. At the foot of the last page: Night of the 25 December, to the 26th  at three oclock in the morning.
xv.
Unfortunately I was not ill. The next day I was obliged to leave the infirmary. My dungeon again received me.
Not ill! indeed, I am young, healthful, and strong; the blood flows freely in my veins; my limbs obey my will; I am robust in mind and body, constituted for a long life. Yes, all this is true; and yet, nevertheless, I have an illness, a fatal illness, an illness given by the hand of man!
Since I came out of the infirmary, a vivid idea has occupied me; a thought which affects me to madness; it is, that I might have escaped, had they left me there! Those physicians, those sisters of charity seemed to take an interest in me. To die so young! and by such a death! One would have imagined they pitied me by their pressing round my bed. Bah! it was curiosity! and then, these people may very well cure one of a fever but not of a sentence of death. And it would be so easy for them! only an open door! What difference would it make to them?
I have no chance now! My plea will be rejected, because all was legal; the witnesses gave correct evidence, the counsel pleaded well, the judges decided carefully. I do not reckon upon it, unless . . . No, folly I there is no hope. The plea is a cord which holds you suspended over an abyss, and which you feel giving way at each instant until it breaks! It is as if the axe of the guillotine took six weeks to fall.
If I could obtain my pardon!  my pardon! From whom? for what? and by what means? It is impossible that I should be pardoned. An example as they say!
I have only three steps to make: Bicêtre, the Conciergerie, the Place de la Grève.
xvi.
During the few hours I passed at the infirmary, I seated myself at a window in the sunshine, for the afternoon had become fine, and I enjoyed all the sun which the gratings of the window would allow me.
I sat thus, my heavy and fevered head within my hands, my elbows on my knees, my feet on the bar of the chair; for dejection had made me stoop, and sink within myself, as if I had neither bone nor muscular power.
The stifling odor of the prison oppressed me more than ever; I still fancied the noise from the convicts chains rung in my ears; I was almost overcome with disgust for Bicêtre. It seemed to me that the good God should take pity on me, and at least send a little bird to sing there, opposite, on the edge of the roof.
I know not if it was the good God or a demon which granted my wish; but almost at the moment I uttered it, I heard beneath my window a voice  not that of a bird, but far. better; the pure, fresh, velvet voice of young girl of fifteen!
I raised my head with a start; I listened with avidity to the song she sung. It was a slow and plaintive air, a sad yet beautiful melody; here are the words:
The following detached note in this text seems to apply to this song: 1829  We reproduce here, for persons interested in this sort of literature, the argot song, reproduced from a copy found among the papers of the condemned. The explanation of the words is written in the hand of the condemned. It is probably that, impressed by this song, but unable to remember it, he secured a copy from some one in the jail. The only thing which this facsimile does not reproduce, is the appearance of the paper, which is yellow, sordid, and crumpled.  V.H.
I heard no more and would not have been able to listen any longer. The meaning, half understood and half hidden, of this horrible lament; this struggle of the brigand with the watch, this robber whom he meets and sends for his wife  this dreadful message, Jai fait suer un chêne et ce suis enfourraillé;2 the wife who goes to Versailles with a petition, and this Majesé who indignantly exclaims that he will make the guilty man dance, la danse où il ny a pas de plancher;3  and all this sung to the sweetest air, and by the sweetest voice that ever soothed human ear! I was shocked, disgusted, overcome. It was a repulsive idea, that all these monstrous words proceeded from a fresh rosy mouth: it was like the slime of a snail over a rosebud.
2 I have sweated an oak and am put in the oven. i.e. has killed a man and is put in prison.
3 Dance where there is no floor, i.e., hung.
I cannot express what I felt; I was at once pained and gratified; the idiom of crime, a language at once sanguinary and grotesque  united to the voice of a young girl, that graceful transition, from the voice of childhood to the voice of woman. All these deformities of words, delightfully sung, cadenced, rounded!
Ah! what infamous thing is a prison! It contains a venom which assails all within its pestilential reach. Everything withers there, even the song of a girl of fifteen! If you find a bird within its courts, it has mud on its wing. If you gather a beauteous flower there, it exhales poison!
xvii.
Oh, if I could only escape, how I would fly across the fields!
No, I must not run  that would draw attention and make people suspicious. On the contrary, I must walk slowly, with my head up, humming a tune. I ought to have an old handkerchief round the lower part of my face, a blue one with a pattern in red on it. It is a capital disguise, all the market-gardeners in the suburbs wear them.
I know of a little clump of trees near Arcueil, by the side of a marsh. Once when I was at school I came there with my playmates to fish for frogs; I would hide myself there until night.
As it grew dark, I recommenced my journey. I would go to Vincennes. No, the river is in the way, I will go to Arpajon. Perhaps it would be better to go by Saint-Germain, and go to Hivre, there I could embark for England. No matter! I come to Longjumeau. A policeman passes me; he asks for my passport . . . I am lost!
Ah! hapless dreamer, first break through the three-foot wall that surrounds you! Death! Death!
I recollect when I was quite a child they brought me to Bicêtre to see the great wall, and the mad people!
xviii
Whilst I was writing this my lamp faded, daylight appeared, and the clock of the chapel struck six.
What can be the meaning of what has since happened? The jailer on duty came into my cell; he took off his cap, bowed to me, apologized for disturbing me, and making an effort to soften his rough voice, inquired what I wished to have for my breakfast.